Hello.
Oh, hello. Please, by all means, grab a seat.
Um, I apologize for my com.
My committee members' absence, we're on a,
what they call a recess week.
So a lot of us are around the country doing various things.
Course. Um, it is lovely to see all of you from
animals A here Aurora, to come in today into parliament.
Uh, we actually have you for 10 minutes, so please
by all means, introduce yourselves.
Um, offer some introductory remarks, please
and your thoughts about your submission.
And if you allow 10, uh, uh, sorry, beg your pardon,
A few minutes, the end of your 10 minutes slot,
that would be great for questions.
Thank you. Um, yeah,
I'll speak for about three or four minutes.
I hope I might go too fast.
Um, so thank you for the opportunity to submit on this bill.
Um, today's giving me a bit of deja vu, sadly.
Uh, my name's Mona.
Today I'm representing Animals Al Turor,
and I've campaigned for pigs for seven years now
for various organizations, including advising
and researching for the high court case in 2020 on the use
of fan crates and mating source.
I've had this exact conversation before.
I was here in front of the select committee in 2018,
submitting an opposition to faring crates.
Just like now, we had a universal answer ban fairing crates.
Naac wrote a submission to say that the use
of fairing crates failed to align with the principles
of our animal welfare act.
We had massive public support for the ban, a petition
of over a hundred thousand signatures,
and we had most pig farmers already not using faring crates.
I would like to start today by reminding you
of the first mention of faring crates potentially
contravening the act.
It was 2005, literally 20 years ago.
That is how old this question is.
I'm pretty sure New Zealand pork would've read
that opinion in 2005 on the Pig Code two.
I raised this because this change
to the Animal Welfare Act would undermine two
decades of animal welfare.
Regulat recommendations.
Delaying action on varying crates may just be entering the
public consciousness now.
But for those of us following in detail,
and I have been following in a lot of detail,
we've seen a minority in the pork industry successfully
lobby the government time
and time again to maintain the status quo.
For some reason, this government
and other governments are choosing to side
with a small number of farmers
and their choice to farm in lower quality in poor practice
ways, a shameful status quo that confines mother pigs
and causes extreme psychological distress.
Pigs are as sentient and require protection,
not just morally, but also legally.
Good animal husbandry
and breeding pigs for better maternal
instincts have shown time
and time again to be the crucial things needed
to ensure the best outcomes for the mother pig.
And to piglets, not cages, it is in the best interest
of the mother pig and her piglets to choose a farming method
that considers the welfare of all.
I ask you to listen to the independent welfare scientists.
Listen to the advice given to your minister
and this committee in the past, that this type
of farmers farming should be illegal.
In 2015, our House
of Representatives actually recognized this.
They changed the Animal Welfare Act to say,
we have some practices that are currently going on
that don't meet our standards,
so let's tidy up the legislation
and let's make a plan to phase them out.
They even specifically mentioned faring crates
as one of these practices.
Um, that was the pr that is the Provision 183 A
that was invoked after the high court ruling.
So I was expecting the use of faring crates to be extended,
but I was expecting it to be extended under that provision
that allows for a one-off extension
if the industry hasn't quite met the standard at the end
of the initial phase out period.
So why aren't we using the existing provision?
I'm saddened to see that despite claiming
to be world leaders in animal welfare here, we are
actively considering eroding evidence of
that saying we are leaders or choosing a lag to lag.
We must instead follow welfare signs, follow experts,
and follow best practice, as was the plan and should remain.
The domestic pork industry has had two decades
to investigate and implement an alternative, plenty
of which are well established in more modern
and superior quality international markets.
The public has a strong opposition to fat,
to the factory farming of every animal, any animal,
but I'd say particularly pigs and cages.
So we can, and we should strengthen our animal welfare
standards and uphold the public values, uh, including
to imported pork products.
But that's probably a conversation for another day.
That will be a sad day for democracy.
I believe if this animal welfare bill is passed,
it will send a depressing message to our farmers.
Continue to lag behind on your standards.
Fail to change when the Animal Welfare Act requires
it fail to change.
When the National Animal Welfare Advisory Committee suggests
that and recommends it fail
to change when the high court rules it fail
to change when the government requires it.
Is this really the standard we expect?
Are we really going to pass a last minute amendment
to our world-leading animal welfare act under urgency rather
than hold our farmers to a higher standard?
Thank you.
Happy to take questions.
As Mark jumped off,
It just dropped off.
I think, I think we've lost Mark.
Sorry, I'm back. Oh, yeah, There you go.
All as well. Thank you very much. Great submission.
I'm very grateful for it,
and I'm always grateful that my, my two IC is ready
and enabled at any moment.
Can we go straight into questions?
Um, I'm sure there's, um, a series of Rachel
or, or Miles or anyone.
I've got questions here.
I've got my hand up if that works. Mark,
Oh, sorry. And please
call out because I can't always see your hand.
Yes, Steve Abel, please go for it.
Um, and thank you very much for your excellent submission.
Mona, I, I wonder, do you think that the pork industry
and farmers in particular can have any certainty around
this extension as the bill proposes to do
for another 10 years of the status quo?
Any certainty around it lasting if there's a change
of government, given the extent
of public feeling against faring crates
and the extent of civil society's commitment to getting rid
of, uh, cages from other pigs?
It's a good question. I mean, we've shown
that we are willing to bend to, you know,
extend this before.
Um, and I think it's just sending a really bad message.
Um, and I, successive governments wanna come in
and tie this up.
I think that's a really good idea.
Can I stop on that, Mr. Chair?
Yeah, you absolutely can, Steve.
And just for clarity, there is actually a, uh,
a permission under the current law
that it could be extended even another five years.
And so the need to extend it for 10 years seems
excessive at, at, uh, at the least.
Yes. So that was,
I think my biggest surprise when I saw this bill,
because the existing legis,
the existing regulation gives farmers five years.
That's when faring crates would be illegal,
and there was already a provision in the act to extend that.
So, um, I must say I had seen
that the farmers weren't reacting.
So I was kind of expecting to see that provision being used.
I would've been disappointed, no doubt,
but I was very shocked to see that, you know,
we're going against, we wrote policy to have an extension,
um, and now, or sorry, we wrote law so
that there could be an extension,
but now we're changing that law to give more extension.
It just, um, didn't follow for me.
Thank you. Yeah, thank you. Steve.
I, if I may, I have a very quick question. Mm-hmm.
Um, you'd be cognizant, I'm sure, of the fact
that Naac has advised the current minister
and has resolved, um, to fill this regulatory gap
that appears to be coming in the legislation,
and that's what this committee committees has resolved
to perhaps fixing, um, whether we agree with it
or not, what is your thoughts that Naac has advised
the minister that this is an operational matter
that can work, um, given
that your former remarks about Naac being on side with its,
its banning per se.
And the other question I do have, which is sort
of supplemental to that, um, as a group of panelists
that have come forward to say you're sort of against, uh,
this proposed legislation
and its changes, has anyone in your group actually got
operational farm experience that would lean into that?
Or is it from the external concerns that you are,
are now weighing in on this?
Um, so just say like myself, um,
I'm the only person here representing Animals Alto,
so I can't speak for everyone else who's come
to represent their organizations.
Um, I do not have, um, operational experience.
So I'm representing, you know, the views of the public, um,
and of the law.
Yeah. Am I, yeah, um,
your first question, I'm sorry.
I think I was struggling to understand exactly
what it was about.
No. If I may, I'll elucidate very quickly.
Na Naac is now advising the minister to suggest
that it could have, uh, the changes that has been suggested.
Oh, you're talking about the seven day? Yes. Yes.
Um, yeah, I think that, you know,
back in 2018 I talked about this committee.
Na, were at that point said they believed four days was the
most, um, that you could justify
and it would all be post farrowing.
Um, you know, because restricting a sale
before they've had the opportunity
to do nest building is probably at the extremist end of, um,
the cruelty involved in farrowing crates.
Although I, you know, obviously the public as opposed
to all of it.
Um, I think network has often taken a conservative approach
to animal welfare.
Um, I think, you know,
they've signaled their concerns with faring crates.
They originally were allowed for six weeks.
They've taken it down to four.
They've now say, they then said,
sorry, they took it down to four weeks.
They then said four days was the most.
Um, so, um, I think the science is just gonna keep evolving
and I'm sure that, um, you know, there's already a wealth
of evidence saying zero days.
Um, so yeah.
Yeah. Thank you. Thank you for that.
And any, any other further questions, uh, members?
Um, yeah, well, I, I wanna thank you very much.
I think your delivery was very succinct.
It certainly raised, um, you know, further thoughts
and ideas for my committee to reconcile as we move forward
with the legislation and any amendments changes
or repeals that may or may not happen.
Um, yeah. So thank you very much for your insights.
Thank you.
Uh, right team.
Um, when we're ready
and able, we have safe, safe animals from,
uh, a saved animals.
Pardon? From exploitation coming forward.
We also have someone
On, oh, please, please bridge
your, bring your guests forward.
That's quite alright. Um, uh, thank you so much
for joining us today.
I'll, I'll just clarify from the clerk that your,
your other person is online.
Yes. Thank you, Carla.
Thank you as always, very diligent.
Uh, so thank you so much for joining us,
um, for 10 minutes today.
We're very grateful for your time.
It's a very precious time. Of course.
Um, I'll leave it with you
and if you could leave some remarks at the end,
that would be most gratefully received by my members.
Hi there. Can everyone hear me and see me? Okay.
Yes. Emma, we can see you. Thank you.
Excellent. Thank you for the opportunity
to speak to you today.
My name is Emma Brody. I'm a campaign manager at safe.
Safe is New Zealand's leading animal rights organization,
and we represent both the interests of animals
and tens of thousands of Kiwis
who support stronger legal protections for them.
Normally, I'd begin by saying
that safe takes its written submission as read,
but I'm not so sure that I can say that today
because this committee simply hasn't been given the time
to truly consider what's at stake.
Here. At the 11th hour,
the government slash the usual three
and a half months for deliberation down to just a few weeks,
that decision moved the goalposts for everyone,
submitters experts, and this committee alike.
Then on the eve of the submission deadline,
crucial documents were quietly released with information
that should have been made available from day one.
This denied New Zealanders the ability to make fully
informed submissions on one
of the most significant rollbacks
to animal welfare law in our history.
It's hard to see this as anything
but a deliberate attempt to limit scrutiny.
Not only that, farrowing crates were meant
to end this December.
That was the legal pathway set after the high court ruling.
And at the very moment, relief
for these animals was about to begin.
This bill intervenes to keep them in cages indefinitely.
No safe's concern is not only for the animals
who will suffer under this bill,
but for what this process says about how we make law inoa.
The Animal Welfare Act was designed to ensure
that decisions about animals are grounded in science,
expert advice, and public consultation.
This bill disregards all three,
it sidelines the independent advisory committee
that Parliament itself created
overrides a clear high court ruling
and ignores the scientific consensus
that fining mother pigs in cages for any amount
of time is detrimental to their welfare.
The proposals before you do not reflect
NACS repeated advice.
They do, however, mirror almost exactly the preferred
regulatory outcomes of NZ pork.
That is a deeply
concerning signal about whose interests are shaping law.
The high court ruling was clear that farrowing crates
and mating stalls breach the Animal Welfare Act
to now amend the act to make those same systems lawful,
undermines the authority of the judicial system
and sets a troubling precedent that when government
disagrees with the courts, it can simply rewrite the law.
What we are witnessing here is the erosion of due process
and with it public trust.
When people see animal welfare decisions made
behind closed doors rushed
through without adequate consultation
and an open defiance of expert advice, they lose faith,
not only in this bill,
but in the entire animal welfare system.
And of course, at the heart of this are sentient animals.
The thousands of mother pigs who will continue
to be confined inside steel cages barely
larger than their bodies.
They cannot turn around.
They cannot move freely, they cannot nurture their piglets.
They will spend birth
after birth in a space where every instinct is denied.
That that is what this bill defends.
Our animal welfare laws exist
to protect animals from precisely this kind of harm.
The law already recognizes the sentt of mother pigs,
and this bill asks you to look away from that fact.
If we make cruelty lawful, we make compassion optional.
And that's not the Al Tiera.
Most New Zealanders believe in this committee,
has the opportunity to defend democratic integrity, the rule
of law, and the dignity of animals,
and we urge you to take it.
I'll now hand over to Deborah.
Thanks, Emma. Uh, as Emma has said,
our concerns about this amendment bill reflect the fact
that animals have not received proper consideration
for their welfare that they should have.
Instead, we've seen a poor process that has been rushed
through lacking in transparency, engagement, and integrity.
The medium media storm that followed the announcement
of this bill, I think, confirms this.
We've also seen a proposal that the majority
of New Zealanders do not care for.
Safe submission includes the results
of a recent public opinion poll by variant on new,
on the New Zealand Animal welfare system,
which included the topic of farrowing crates.
And this should be taken into serious consideration.
The results showed
that three in four New Zealanders oppose the use
of farrowing crates and support a ban on their use.
98% of people believe it's important
to protect animals from cruelty and neglect.
88% of people believe animals should have the freedom to go
outside when they want.
And only 39% believe the government is doing a good job
enforcing the Animal Welfare Act,
which highlights a broader crisis
of confidence in New Zealand's animal welfare framework.
But it should be noted that 46% of respondents said
that they would be more likely to vote for a party pledging
to ban farrowing crates.
And when you think about it, this is a big deal
for any animal welfare policy
because it offers no tangible benefit to people
or their day-to-day lives.
And I think this says a, a lot about
how people value animal welfare in this country.
Also, of note, this polling spans across every demographic.
So urban and rural, young and old,
and across all political lines, which shows
that this is not a niche concern,
but a mainstream moral position.
While the standards in this bill have been put forward as
amongst the highest in the world, this is not true.
This bill will set farmers up to fail
because the tolerance for crawl systems has come to an end.
And other countries
around the world have already started banning the use or,
or have done, um, the ongoing use of farrowing crates.
If this bill is approved, New Zealand will be seen
as a country that supports animal cruelty, misery,
and confinement for animals and outdated systems.
And we'll make our farmers stand out
for all the wrong reasons.
I am particularly appealing to the members
of the National Party
to reconsider their support for this bill.
As I know it is not a bill your party has introduced,
but one that you will be ultimately held responsible for.
In our opinion, it lets the, the public mandate
for this type of change.
It is bad policy, it is bad politics.
You are all in a position to make positive changes
for mother pigs and for New Zealand farmers.
Please don't let this opportunity you have
as elected members of parliament go to waste.
I urge you to withdraw your support
for this bill in its entirety.
Thank you.
Thank you, Deborah. I'm very grateful for,
I'm not sure if you can see me.
My camera's playing silly. Um, silly things.
Um, members, anyone got questions?
Yes, I do. Yes, Please, please. By go, by all means.
Hi, um, Debra. Hi, Emma. Thanks for your submission.
Um, I'm gonna ask a lot of people this question today,
and I've already asked some submitters who came in earlier.
One of the, uh, issues that comes up, um, for us
as a committee is advice that, uh,
obviously farrowing crates are not, uh, god
for animal welfare outcomes for mother pigs, for cells.
Um, but equally there without them,
there can actually be an impact on piglets.
So I'm just interested in, um,
any research you've got access to around, um,
things like mortality for piglets, um, you know,
when they've been born, um, in that environment.
And that the, the fact that sows can actually crush them in
their, you know, in their first few days.
'cause that's one of the challenges, I think in terms
of the advice we receive, is the,
is balancing up the animal welfare needs of the sow
and the animal welfare needs of the piglets.
I'm just interested if you've got any comments on that?
Uh, yes, I can speak to that a little bit.
Um, of course, we know that the introduction of Pharaoh
and crates was driven by this need to protect, um,
piglets from crushing.
But of course, that problem has come from the fact
that we've bred mother pigs to be so large
and to have such large litters that that's more of a risk.
So rather than addressing the root causes of that problem,
um, we've got this, this very cruel bandaid solution.
Um, but what the research tells us is that the welfare
of piglets is closely tied to the wellbeing of their mother.
And so when the mother is under a lot of stress,
and it can lead to the mother, you know, acting in,
you know, not,
not the best way towards her piglet having higher risk
of mis mothering.
And the research also shows
that there are actually higher still birth rates delayed,
excess to colostrum,
lower growth rates in their first days of life.
And so free farrowing systems so better supports the welfare
of both mother picks and their piglets.
Tha thank you for that comment.
Sorry, we're gonna have to call time team.
We are, um, got you this afternoon. I apologize for that.
Um, but thank you for your comments, very grateful
for your comments, and we'll move on to our next submission.
Thank you so much. Thank you. Thank
You. Thank
You. Thank you all.
Thank you. Very grateful.
Um, we're now gonna have the Animal Justice Party come in.
Hello. Hello. How are you?
Good, thank you. Thank you so much
for joining us this afternoon.
We're very grateful for your time.
Um, I, I'll leave you with it.
I'm sure you know the, the process.
Um, we have 10 minutes
and, um, please allow, uh, a little bit of time at the end.
Four comments and questions.
Thank you, chair Cameron and committee.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
As you would've heard, I'm danter from the
Animal Justice Party.
I'll take our written submission as read
and make some additional points.
So the Associate Minister of Agriculture said in his email,
uh, to the chair of Naac that this is, quote,
a complicated subject matter with a multitude
of viewpoints in factors that need to be considered in order
to best balance high animal welfare standards while
providing a regulatory framework within which the pork
sector can operate.
So firstly, it's our animal welfare standards.
They're not super high,
they're not these high impossible standards.
And secondly, this is not a balance
between cruelty and cash.
That is not the correct premise here.
Welfare is the baseline, not something to trade for profit.
So then the minister continues to make a point
that the New Zealand pork industry is outside
of the Naac mandate, but relevant to his considerations.
And while that may be relevant to him, it's not relevant
to this at all.
The Animal Welfare Act certainly does not contain a cause
that says, unless it's expensive.
Economic inconvenience is not a defense for cruelty.
It's also not relevant, uh, around the innovation project
that he mentions that's not ready while interesting,
still not relevant.
So the bill before you emits that cages cause harm,
as it says that harm should be shortened.
So the minister clearly acknowledges
that cages are not okay,
but confinement doesn't come hu become
humane just because it's brief.
For a few moments, the mother pig is locked in.
Her suffering begins whether it's
for a few hours or a few weeks.
The pain, stress, and deprivation are all the same.
And as you've heard today, uh, many times,
I'm sure pigs are extraordinary animals.
They have excellent memories, they can solve problems,
puzzles respond to commands, even play computer games.
They are deeply social, forming strong bonds
with other pigs, animals, and humans.
And they show empathy, playfulness, and mourn losses.
A mother pig is particularly remarkable.
She sings softly to her piglets as they feed a a,
a lovely lullaby that comforts them.
And when living naturally, she spends hours building a nest
before giving birth, gathering straw, leaves, twigs,
arranging, rearranging, making it just right.
Um, and then she hums to her unborn babies.
And when they arrive, she helps each
of them find her milk and learn her voice.
And inside a cage, that entire world disappears.
Mama cannot turn around, she cannot walk or nest or nuzzle.
Her piglets, her instincts remain, but her body is trapped.
However, I don't need to say any of this.
'cause as you know, in 2020, the high court ruled
that faring crates and mating stools are unlawful.
And yet, instead of complaining,
the minister is proposing a change to the law itself
to make legal what the courts declared illegal.
So think about what this means.
The courts found that these cages cause unnecessary harm
and breach the law.
And then what happened did like a small amount
of the industry just not like that.
And so instead of meeting its legal
and moral obligations, the government proposes
to rewrite the rules
to protect a really small group in the industry
and not all of the pigs.
Um, and how many of these approximate 44 farmers
actually conformed in the last five years?
And what does it say to those that did,
if 44 trade businesses didn't follow the law,
will this process apply?
It's like a company failing every health and safety audit.
And instead of fixing the hazards,
the government simply changes the rules so
that the company passes.
This is not about science, it's about time and money.
So this bill tries to sidestep the law entirely.
It shortens cruelty calls, it progress,
and then expects the public to be dominated.
But harm is harm and cruelty doesn't become legal
because you put a timer on it.
This bill was also shortsighted
and will cause more economic pain, especially
as it's been advised that we will likely have to move.
Uh, most people around the world will move free from
cages eventually anyway.
So this makes it a very costly slow two step.
Countries that have banned cages,
have seen stronger litters, lower mortality,
and healthier mothers stress-free pigs eat better,
recover faster, and nurture better.
And when pigs thrive, farmers thrive.
Welfare is not the enemy of productivity.
It is the foundation of it.
And so how will this also be managed or monitored?
And what is the cost to that?
I don't really need to make a case against pigs
and cages as it is, as it is a decision
that is already made.
Pigs don't belong in cages, it breaks the law.
And yet this bill ties New Zealand to outdated systems
and damages our international reputation.
And the iron here is staggering.
So for years we've been told
that animal advocates are too emotional,
that we push ideaology over practicality.
But right now, the minister
and some of the industry are doing exactly that.
And it also sets a very dangerous precedent because
If I don't, excuse me, I don't mean to cut you off,
but you, you're doing marvelously well,
but I just make you aware, if we run outta time,
you won't allow, or we won't have time for questions.
Sorry. We won't be allowed to, uh, afford you questions.
So I'll leave it to you and you can decide.
Thank you, chair. Was that 10 minutes for
Yes, it was 10 minutes.
I'm just cognizant that there will be questions. That's all.
Thank you, chair. Um, with that,
I will just, I will wrap up.
I'll remind us that the Animal Welfare Act 1999 was created
to give effect to our moral
and legal duty to protect animals from unnecessary pain
and distress as sets enforceable, minimal standards
that shouldn't be about politics
or profit law reform has always been part of progress.
Parliament should strengthen our laws when evidence shows
harm, not weaken them.
When evidence is clear, there's a world of difference
between reform that improves protection
and reform that excuses cruelty.
What's happening now is not reform.
It's actually, uh, retreats.
So five quick points in summary.
So from our understanding, this decision has been made.
The, the courts have ruled the cages unlawful.
The minister has already admitted
that these cages cause harm by suggesting
to shorten the time spent in them.
Harm is harm regardless of duration.
This bill rewards non-compliance.
A small number of farmers refuse to follow the law.
And instead of enforcement, the government
is proposing changing the rules
for them setting a very dangerous precedent.
Economic inconvenience is not a defense for cruelty.
And this argument is incorrect as it's shortsighted.
And many costs have not been factored into
the economic argument.
And progress means strengthening animal welfare laws not
retreating from them.
So very obviously,
the Animal Justice Party urges you to reject this. Bill.
Thank you very much. Thank you so much for your comments.
Uh, questions, members just, just speak up
because I can't see your hand, please.
Okay. There appear to be an, I've got a quick question.
Um, do you know the adult weight of a breeding cell just out
of, in, out of interest?
No. Is that something that, you know, chair?
I I can, I can elucidate.
There are about 300 and they have the capacity to bite.
Are you concerned that the removal of faring crates entirely
would actually put the burden of animal welfare, uh, a a
over and above human welfare
and that, that, that the fact that they're 300 plus kilos
and they can bite.
So clearing piglets can be a, a risk
to human health if these animals are domestically
farmed. What's your thoughts on that?
I'm sure that we can, uh, look overseas
and where this is happening successfully
and look at all of those, uh, treatments for mitigation.
I also read an old article this morning, uh,
around a pig farmer here in New Zealand
and former vet who said that she has, um,
and to, sorry, just touching on this, on, on your point.
Rachel has mitigated piglet crushing without the,
without the cages.
Um, and that healthier piglets, uh, are the key to this.
And, uh, overseas studies show
that wheat piglets are the one most likely to be crushed.
So what I'm making a point here by tying into answers.
But those, it already all the answers exist here in
New Zealand and overseas, so I'm sure we can refer to, um,
to places where this is already
happening and get those answers.
Thank you so much for your comments.
Thank you very much, team.
Very grateful for your time this afternoon.
Uh, time is I, I'll leave you with it.
Thank you so much for your remarks
and your very succinct, uh, delivery.
Have a, have, have a great afternoon.
Thank you. Right.
Teams, uh, members we now move across to offer lay farms,
I believe, uh, the clerk, ha, I'm not sure if
that is in person or via Zoom.
We have one more before that. Mr. Chair.
New Zealand Animal Law Association.
Oh, gracious me. I apologize.
I've got my list the wrong way around. Okay. That's okay.
No, no. Well, let's move, let's move on to that submission.
Carla. Thanks a million.
Got it. We have, um, Dr.
Marcello Rodriguez Ferre online. Um,
Hello Doctor. How are you sir?
Uh, thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Thank you. Committee.
Um, I'm going to speak for about three minutes
and then hopefully try to sort
of dedicate the rest to questioning.
Um, I'm the president of the New Zealand Animal Law
Association, is also an associate professor here at the
Auckland Law School, where I specialize in animal law,
but also public law and regulatory theory.
Uh, my organization, the N-Z-A-L-A challenged, uh,
the existence of faren crates
and mating stalls, which was subject to this bill, uh,
and the proposed regulations five years ago.
Um, the court
and then the national, uh, animal Welfare Advisory Committee
and the government all agreed at that stage
that it was appropriate to phase fair and crates
and mating stalls out.
The fact that we are discussing this five years later
as a result, is a cause
of mild disappointment, to say the least.
Um, and I wanna make sort of three points as
to why I'm, I'm deeply concerned.
And, uh, we have the view that this is one
of the most regressive acts of, uh,
animal welfare legislation in New Zealand's modern history.
Uh, the first issue is as all of the,
the panelists I'm sure will sort of accept,
and the government has accepted, uh,
the proposed regulations
and the bill permit devices that would
otherwise be illegal under the Animal Welfare Act.
They are permitting, uh, devices that do not provide
for good animal welfare.
Now, there's near scientific consensus on that,
and there's also sort of no good justification
for departing from it.
The economic justification, uh, as well
as the issue in terms of sort
of piglet mortality have both been shown, uh, simply not
to be sufficient to justify the use of these devices.
And that's not my view.
That is the National Animal Welfare Advisory
Committee's view.
I don't really wanna litigate that
because I'm not an animal welfare scientist.
And Naac, SBCA
and International, um, uh, advisory bodies are the experts.
It's also an appropriate forum for to be, uh,
for those issues to discuss in, in that forum.
The select committee process is a very, very poor way of,
of really pressure testing those ideas and, and these ideas
and, and the issues had already been pressure tested
and examined, uh, three years ago when NOAC ex, uh,
engaged in extensive, um, consultation.
So that's the first point.
This is permitting, uh, activity and devices that would
otherwise be illegal under the Animal Welfare Act.
The second point is that this is, um, uh, the process of,
of allowing for these devices is,
is is significantly contrary to good law making practice.
And there are two sort of sub points to this.
One, using the select committee process
and primary legislation to allow
for secondary legislation in the way
that this is occurring is a deeply inefficient
and inappropriate use of primary legislation as well
as parliament's time.
As I say, the select committee process is just an
extraordinarily poor way
of engaging in the appropriate scrutiny that's necessary
for this type of regulation.
But much more important to that,
this legislation has been remarked by other submitters, uh,
deans, what would otherwise be illegal to be legal.
Um, and in doing so, this validating provision,
a retrospective validating provision at least will be the
first time where, uh, validating provisions,
deeming provisions in this way have been used in a way
that fundamentally undermines the purpose
of the Animal Welfare Act.
Sometimes it's necessary to have de provisions
and validating provisions of this type.
And there are a few examples of this, uh,
the police Oaths Amendment Act, for example, which would've,
uh, otherwise allowed for police officers, uh, to, uh,
who had not had, uh, been properly sworn in, um, for, uh,
arrests taken by them to be sort
of, uh, challenged in the court.
That was a sort of emergency legislation that required, uh,
validating and, uh, retrospective, uh,
dealing provisions to be used.
But that was in alignment with the, the purpose of the act.
Here we are seeing regulations being allowed that would
otherwise be not possible under the Animal Welfare Act.
It fundamentally undermines the purpose of the act.
And we've never seen this
before in the history of New Zealand lawmaking that goes
to show just how dangerous this is as a precedent
and inappropriate it is as a method
of allowing these devices that really would only sort
of benefit 44 farms within New Zealand.
That's deeply, deeply problematic
from a lawmaking perspective.
Uh, it actually fails that the clear test
that a regulatory standards build once it becomes
law would mandate.
The final issue though, uh, that I want to, uh, address Mr.
Chair members of the committee is
that this fundamentally sort of undermines the, uh,
clear processes that have already occurred.
As I mentioned, three years ago,
awake undertook an extensive, uh, consultation process, uh,
involving four and a half thousand detailed submissions,
plenty of meetings, lots of good animal welfare, science,
and lots of investigation as to
what the most appropriate approach would be
to transition industry away from these devices.
That is all now being erased
and erased for no good reason whatsoever.
Beyond industry pressure
that has occurred in the last three years since the change
of government, there has been little
or no consultation, uh, with every stakeholder
that is interested in this issue.
Instead, it seems to be a very targeted consultation, uh,
with only one side of, of the issue, the pork industry.
Uh, and occasionally it seems, uh, the ministry
for primary industries.
But these BCA has been excluded. We have been excluded.
Other, um, animal welfare scientists have been excluded.
Uh, and naac, who is the appropriate body
to determine this has also been sidelined.
And that was only given sort of insult
to injury during this process.
And the way that this bill has been, has, has come about,
uh, as has been mentioned by many other submitters, uh,
with the ministry for primary industries are releasing
documents that were fundamentally important
to making informed submission less than 24 hours
before submissions closed.
So just to recap those points again, one,
this permits devices that would
otherwise be illegal, and that's a problem.
Mother pigs need a voice in this particular instance.
We need to have that front of mind.
Second, this is contrary to all good lawmaking principles
and sets a very dangerous precedent.
And three, it really sort of undermines the process
and consultative procedures that have already taken place
for these three, uh, points.
We strongly oppose, uh, this bill
and would encourage members, uh,
who care about good lawmaking,
but also good animal welfare processes
and the fidelity of parliamentary intent all the way back in
2015, uh, to reject this bill.
I'm happy to take questions.
Thank you very much. John. I'll lead off if I may,
and then I'm sure members will have questions in
quite a succinct fashion.
You talk about the fidelity of the parliamentary process.
Um, as you would be aware, this was Bill was put in front
of my committee
and I resolved that my committee is very good at their job.
And, uh, and, and I'm struck by your remarks about that,
that perhaps the select process
would not be the right vehicle for scrutinizing the bill.
And perhaps you could elucidate a little bit further how,
how you think that is.
So given that there's three active farmers on this committee
that have an interest in animal welfare and the other chair,
Certainly, Mr. Chair, I
can just because of the time I, I, I'll get
to your question specifically.
Look, there's no disrespect to members of the committee.
You are all experienced, uh, members of parliament,
and I acknowledge the farming experience of three of you.
I want to respect that significantly.
However, you are not animal welfare scientists.
And the National Animal Welfare Advisory Committee was the
body that was set up to determine exactly
what would be the most appropriate approach
for animal welfare standards.
These are nitty gritty aspects of animal welfare regulation.
It should not be for this select committee, which is dealing
with high level scrutiny of high level primary legislation
to talk about specific standards.
We already have processes for that.
And that's what I meant by that comment,
that this is a waste of your time
and it is a much more appropriate, uh, to commit
welfare advisory committee. Sir,
I'm genuinely very grateful for your remarks,
but how do you then square
that the minister has got direct advice from Naac in,
in the creation of the legislation
that we're now fronted by.
Naac has opposed the use of our own crates
and mating stalls since their very existence has had to sort
of flip flop due to sort
of ministerial pressure through that.
But is the last five years has consistently maintained
that faring crates would not be permissible under the
Animal Welfare Act.
Okay. I, well, I'm just interested
that they're now advising them members, uh,
this is a very good submission.
Uh, uh, any other questions there?
I've got a question, Mr. Chair,
Please, Steve, by all means.
Yeah. Thank you very much. Uh, uh, excellent submission.
Um, Marcelo further to that point about NAICS advice in your
chapter 26, you say,
following the extensive consultation process
that went on in 2022, NAC recommended the minister move
to free faring option,
therefore banning the use of faring crates.
And NAC wrote to the incoming minister in October, 2023,
minister Hoggard recommending the same code
and regulations without alteration on the
1st of February, 2024.
So they're very clear to this new minister that
this government should move to free farrowing
after that substantive consultation.
And then another consultation happened with industry only.
Is that your understanding of what's gone on?
That is my understanding.
Steve, thank you very much for that.
It's been very clear that Naac has done the,
the work has looked at the, the different options
and recommended free flowering not only to this government,
but the previous government.
And that is, is where the science is at at the moment.
So are, are you concerned about the extent of, um,
industry influence on this piece of legislation
where it's really a, a cut
and paste of what the pork industry wanted,
but isn't actually paying attention to
what animal experts are saying?
Quite, I mean, it's astonishing
that this essentially is a cut and paste job and that
therefore the, the very extensive and,
and good advice that has been
provided by the body that was set up by government
and parliament to advise the minister on the best animal
welfare standards possible has been sidelined.
It is, you know, it is not a conspiracy theory to suggest
that, you know, but for the New Zealand pork's pressure
here, we wouldn't be here today.
And, and that's a deep problem with the regulatory system
and everybody should be concerned about that, regardless
of which side of the house you're on.
Thank You. Thank you very much, gentlemen.
We've met time, very grateful for everyone, uh,
that's offered our thoughts afternoon on this matter.
We'll move on now to our next submission.
And thank you Mr. Anderson
for keeping me in succinct timing.
Uh, we've got offer lay farms.
Are they online parlor or in person?
They looks like they're just coming in now.
Thank you. Thank you, Laura. Thanks.
Sorry My way.
Are you there? Yeah, I am.
Can you hear me, Sean? Yes, it is. Yeah.
Good to see you, mate. I, um, I'll leave it with it.
We've got 10 minutes, uh, for you
to make the necessary comments.
Please allow time for
questions if you would like them to be asked of you.
So I'll leave it in your capable hands.
Thank you. Uh, just a quick background on me.
Uh, I'm a second generation pig farmer.
Uh, we are located not far from Christchurch.
Um, we've been at this for about, uh,
a little bit over 45 years.
Um, we're an in indoor, uh, um, farming system, uh,
high health, high hygiene.
Um, and we use, uh, current use frates.
Um, as part of our system.
Um, we realize that it's a bit of a vexed, uh, issue.
Um, and although, um, there are some behavioral outcomes
for the SOW that are, um, limited, there's huge benefits
for, um, for piglets, um, being, uh, raised in, uh,
uh, faring system.
So we are big supporters of the faring systems for
that reason, because it really protects, uh, the piglets,
but also outside that,
and I think you alluded that not long, uh, just
before Mark, that, um,
these also protect our staff and myself.
Um, when we're working with these large animals,
they are very large.
Um, and the piglets, um, relatively small.
And for those that aren't aware, a piglet weighs about 0.5%
of its mother's body weight when it's born, and only two
and a half percent of its mother's body
weight when they're weaned.
So for a mother to lie on a small piglet, um,
they hardly can feel that when they're, particularly,
when they're, when they're newborn.
So these systems provide, um,
great protection for the, for the piglets.
Um, and the proposed, uh, legislation
or rules here, looking at going to three days prior
and four days post, um, uh, I, I guess as a farmer, for me
that's really pushing the limits of, um, where we'd like
to be, uh, one on the prior,
because, um, some sows can drop not many,
but some up to five days before, um, faring,
but most of 'em would feel fall within that three days.
And then, um, the post farrowing then, um,
yeah, that, um, from the information
that we see from overseas, um, four days, uh, post works,
but not in all cases.
Um, so where it doesn't, uh, work
or become problematic is we, we've got animals, uh, sows
that have got sick during the, um, firing process.
So retained membranes, mastitis, et cetera.
When they're in those condition, when they're,
when they're sick like that, they tend to, the animals tend
to flop down and they're not as careful, um,
when they, uh, lay down.
And that's where we can see, um, increased layovers
and deaths of, um, piglets.
So, um, yeah, it's providing a, a good compromise, um,
and a system where we can still protect the piglets.
And if we need to foster animals, then we can, um,
restrict the, uh, movement of the sow so that she can't, um,
uh, attack or harm those, um, newly fostered piglets.
So they work, um, quite well for that.
Um, one of the questions I did have,
'cause there's not a lot of detail around how this is going
to work, but is on, uh, there's some questions
around recording and how we're going to, um, demonstrate,
um, that we are sticking to these, um,
three days prior and four days after.
Um, I think that's gonna be a little bit difficult to,
um, to follow through.
So it'd be interesting to see what you come up with there.
Um, yeah.
Um, the other one that I want, well,
and then with the powering also for, on our particular farm,
there's a huge cost involved.
So, 'cause we're an older piggery, um, we're, we're on a,
with our consents from, um, the local authority restricted
to a, a footprint, uh, of, of what we can use.
So, um, for us to be able to fit the new faring systems in,
they're, they're, they're basically a, they're not,
it's not gonna be able to be
remodeled on, on what we've got.
It's gonna have to be a, um, a rebuild.
So for us, that's gonna mean, uh, we have to
relocate one building that we mate in currently pull
that building down, build half the faring accommodation we
need, take down an older building, um,
and then, uh, rebuild on that.
And then we'll have two other buildings that one
of them's probably been through three remodels.
Um, and it's probably, yeah, the way it's set up now that
that building won't be able to be used after that.
And the other one, I'm, I'm not sure we may be able to use
that for a mating, mating building.
Um, but the costs, um, here are significant.
The, the faring is
by far the most expensive accommodation we have.
It's, um, there's a lot of energy, a lot
of money going into that.
And particularly with these new systems, um, to, to get them
to run effectively and to keep our pre preventing mortality
low, we really need to control
the atmosphere in these rooms.
So, um, I believe that we sort of,
not quite air conditioning,
but um, we'll need a cool pad technology in there
to keep the room consistent so we don't get, um,
animals being laid over
because the temperature in the room between the nest and,
and the, um, the general area of the pen is very,
very important for, um, making sure that we, we, um,
we don't get animals crushed
and the name of our game is, is keeping pigs alive.
Um, we also, uh, have gotta change to the space allowance,
which is also a, um, a really major, um, cost for us.
So on what's proposed at the moment
with a 0.034 space allowance,
we're looking at about a 13% increase for our growing pigs.
Um, I don't have up to date costs
'cause I haven't in the last five years, we haven't really,
we've been in a holding pattern.
We haven't been able to build or do anything,
but it's somewhere around $1,500 a square
meter, um, to do that.
Um, for us it's about 250 square meters
and about 400,000, um, dollars.
So along as as, as well as doing the faring,
we're gonna have to do this as well,
but also got questions around, um,
that increase in the K value, um, from all the stuff that,
uh, information that I've seen and,
and what we've talked around in the, um, in the industry,
the 0.34 for, we run large social pens,
so somewhere between, depending between 150
to a hundred pigs per pen,
and we're on fully slatted, uh, plastic floors.
So all of the, the D falls through.
Um, and the information that we see on that is,
is we don't need as much space.
The, the, that larger space is really for smaller pens
where, um, they don't have a lot of room to move around.
And where you've got, um, deep, deep litter, um,
fouling the pens as they go,
You'd be so obliging, sir to sort
of work towards a wrap up because we'll have questions.
Uh, yeah, so, um, so yeah, that, that,
this is a significant thing
and I'd, I'd like to see that, um, reduced to 0.03.
There's no not really anywhere else in the world
that's running, um, space allowances that that large, um,
and yeah, it's gonna, it
for us is there's a whole lot more complication,
which I'm pretty sure is being submitted on by the industry
and others, uh, around, um, how you manage that.
Um, so yeah, it is gonna, it is potential there for that
to be some real negative outcomes for, um,
for pigs if we have to move them more often
and break up their social groups.
Um, you could keep me going for hours on this,
but um, I guess if people have got questions,
I'd probably rather, um, let them ask the questions
and um, go from there.
Thank you, Sean. Thank you. I just, cognizant of time.
Sorry, apologies. Um, members questions?
Yeah, I've got one. Thanks Mark.
I go from deputy chair Miles Anderson, Sean. So
A couple of the, uh, submitters earlier had stated
that the science shows that, um, far equate crates,
um, don't lift the survival rate
of the litter.
And, um, the, the, um, contention was that actually,
um, the free range type arrangements or, or,
or different arrangements have just as um,
good litter survival rates.
What's your comment on that?
Well, that's why we went indoors
because it's not, it's just simply not true.
Um, out in your deep litter systems,
you can't always account for the piglets
that are missing too 'cause they get lost in the straw.
But yeah, that was,
that was the whole reason why we came in.
You can, you can have savaging where a whole, uh, um,
a sour completely dis destroy the whole litter.
Um, there's, there's no control in there.
You know, you get the hot in the summertime when you're in
the, um, in the faring arc and,
and the sows are uncomfortable 'cause it's too warm.
And so they're constantly moving over, rolling around,
trying to get comfortable.
Um, yeah, just simply not true.
Thank you. Miles. Uh, no Supplementaries.
I got one. Yes please, Steve.
Excellent. Um, uh, Sean, do I understanding correctly that
with the new proposal
and those, that 13% increase in the size of the crate, um,
and the K value stuff, you are,
you are facing a big expenditure, um,
with this proposal anyhow,
and you're not sure that that's, uh, well, you're concerned
that that's not worth the, the benefit of it.
And I wonder, um, does it add to the uncertainty
for farmers, given the extent of public opposition?
And clearly those of us in the opposition parties
are not happy with this extension,
so a new government may well come
and change this legislation.
My, my question is really moving to
free farrowing is gonna be an expense, obviously
that's recognized, uh,
but also even this will be an expense.
And if you don't want farmers investing money
in a new system that might be made illegal
by future government, would that be a concern
for you as a farmer?
Yeah, absolutely. It's a concern with this.
These varying systems are hugely expensive on indoor
operations and you build them bespoke to what they are.
So, um, you know, that,
that's why in my submission I haven't put any costs in,
'cause I, one, I dunno what we've gotta change to, um, two
and I dunno what the rules around that.
Um, but yeah, we need flexibility
and, you know, comments around, you know, going
to these fully loose systems and I'm a, I'm a farmer.
I'm, I'm passionate about the welfare of the animals
and I wanna see the, um, the sour and the piglet thrive,
but there's some compromises there.
So if we put them into a crate,
the sow's gotta compromise a little bit.
If we leave them in the loose, then the,
the piglets are gonna compromise a lot
and some of 'em are gonna lose their, their lives.
So I'm more interested in what's right for the animals.
Um, and, and does well, um,
le less so the law, you know what I mean?
Not that I'm break the law, but I, uh,
I'm more interested in what's right for the animal.
And um, and that's why as an industry we've been barracking
so hard for, um, for, for keeping holders and crates
or having some sort of confinement
because anybody that works
with pigs will know just, you just intuitively know
that this is, this is better
'cause you've seen it live it every day.
How do the 50% of farmers who are doing it without
Thanks, Steve, we've we're, we're almost at time.
I'd be happy to answer that. But um, yeah, the guys
that aren't, they're outdoor farmers,
they haven't spent the money that we've invested.
'cause half the industry is are outdoor guys.
That's where we started as, as a farming business
and moved in indoors because, um, yeah.
So those guys struggle. People that fall tend to fall out
of our industry tend to be the outdoor guys when it gets
tough because it's so much, it's cheaper to get into,
but it's much more expensive and,
and you have these wild swings in production when, um,
when things go wrong, it's,
it's hard. Those guys are tough.
Great answer, great answer.
Sean, thank you so much for your time. Sorry mate.
We're at time. It goes very, very quickly.
I think you've done marvelously well
to represent your interests
and uh, my committee will certainly have many opinions
formed on the basis, basis of your submission.
So thanks again for your time. Thank
You very much. Thanks
Steve. Sorry mate, to cut you off.
We're just, we're just a bit over time.
Um, now we're go to groups of New Zealand animal
scientists, I believe Carla.
Yes. Thank you. Thank you Carlos, for your help.
Um, we'll move across to hearing from them.
Okay, Good to see you all.
Thank you so much for joining the primary
production select committee.
I apologize for our absence.
Uh, we are not in a non sitting week and around
and about in the country, um, via Zoom.
So please by all means, um, put your comments forward
and if you're, uh, kind enough, we'll have some
questions left for you at the end if
you allow us bit of time.
Just, Uh, can we please check
that our colleague, uh, Dr.
Karin Schutz is online before we get going? Ah,
I might, my lovely clerk will do that for you.
Thank you. Yes. So there, excellent. Thank you so much.
Uh, and thank you very much for having us.
I was, uh, going to say I was very envious
of you sitting in your car on the farm,
but I know things are tough out there at the moment, so
I, I was hoping it wasn't obvious, but it appears to be so
No. Great. So,
uh, uh, Koto, we are here representing a group
of New Zealand animal welfare scientists, so
that's why we have a slightly unusual name on the list.
Mm-hmm. I'm Dr.
Kate Litten and in person here with me is Dr. Mari Stewart.
And online we have our colleague Dr. Karen Schutz.
So, um, I will just very briefly highlight some
points in our submission.
We understand that you are taking them as read,
but uh, we think it's worth focusing on a few key points.
So, um, our qualifications are an animal veterinary
and animal behavior sciences, along with our cos submitters.
We are animal welfare scientists
with deep experience across research, policy
and practice in New Zealand and internationally.
And, uh, we wanted to add that
that does include research on commercial farm
situations in New Zealand.
So, um, that's our usual, uh, sort
of comfort zone if you like, and, and area of operating.
So in summary, in our submission,
we provide a scientific report
that draws on the latest research from
both industry and academia.
This evidence reinforces previous findings
that farrowing crates lead
to poor animal welfare in sows and piglets.
Since the NAAC code report in 2021,
which was based on the science at the time,
there have been several international developments generated
from research as well
as recommendations from scientific committees
and leading pig welfare experts
with extensive commercial experience around the use
of farrowing crates.
Recent studies have, in our view, reinforced
and expanded earlier findings.
As a result, we do not support the amendment bill
as it is proposed.
Uh, we support the fact that it is an attempt
to progress animal welfare,
but we do not support the bill as proposed.
So onto our recommendations.
As we said, we reviewed the science since NACS report,
and we consider that it aligns with
and reinforces nacs advice to the minister in 2021.
We make several specific recommendations in our submission
and we outline the science behind them.
Farrowing crates, uh, as we've heard,
and as as you're well aware, can find sows,
so they cannot carry out their most fundamental
and motivated behaviors, including nest building shortly
before farrowing, and they compromise.
Health crates are associated with more stillbirths
and piglets are deprived of mother young interactions.
Farrowing crates also enable management practices
that compromise welfare.
We therefore recommend that, uh, you
as the committee consider promoting cage-free farrowing
and lactation mandating that cells and piglets are
provided with sufficient space in farrowing conditions, uh,
whether those are in free systems
or temporary confinement for a transition.
Mandating nesting materials
and space increases for farrowing cells and piglets.
Mandating space increases also for growing pigs.
We touch on, um,
and, uh, supporting farmers to transition urgently,
and that was really well highlighted in the presentation.
Um, or in the submission that we just heard.
We recognize that there could be a need
for temporary confinement during a transition period.
Um, but we recommend no more than four days post farrowing
based on the science, our review of the science
and allowing for nest building activities as a temporary,
uh, time limited transition period.
We believe it's critical to understand
that we cannot simply open up current farrowing crates
without changes in their size and design.
Pen size must be increased to the same size.
Whether pigs are in temporary confinement
or free farrowing systems, science shows
that piglet mortality could increase with these changes.
In summary, we support the amendment bill's intent
to improve pig welfare, as I said,
and we urge the committee to ensure
that scientific evidence remains central
to regulatory design.
Um, at this point, we would like
to proactively address the question about piglet
versus cell welfare.
We do go through this in our submission.
These are systemic farm systems issues.
In other words, um, in our view, it's essentially artificial
and simplistic in a sense to be, uh, black
and white on piglets versus so there are farrowing systems
that meet the welfare needs of sows and piglets.
Our submission gives the evidence that the current proposal
to confine cells
and crates as is, so as the crates are now for seven days
with no changes to pen
or crate size, is likely to lead
to an increase in piglet mortality.
Um, we need to understand that behind the statistics
for mortality lies the events
and the experiences of
that animal in the lead up to the death.
Thank you. So, uh, just briefly want
to touch on support for pork producers.
We recognize, um, as anyone will listening to submissions,
the challenges for farmers,
and we strongly advocate for urgent support to transition
to higher welfare systems.
Again, this was just pointed out, this must be done
with clarity and commitment
and not drawn out into an uncertain
and unsustainable middle ground.
As happened with layer hens, producers need certainty
and not another decade of limbo.
We think decision makers should be concerned
that pork producers will be investing in a system
that is not future proof.
Finally, we understand that science is only one part
of the decision making process,
but we urge you to read our report
as independent evidence-based advice on the impacts
of crates on piglet and sour welfare.
The science is clear confinement and crates harms sour
and piglet welfare, and the time to act as now.
And we welcome your questions. Thank you.
Thank you all for being, uh, uh, both in present
and online and sharing your thoughts.
We very great for your thoughts.
I'll lead off with a quick question off I can,
you spoke about, um, grow growing pig, grow a piglets pig.
Your pardon, having the area that is needed.
Um, you also alluded to the fact
that you all have a background and, and or behavior.
I'm struck by the, the dichotomy of that remark, given
that pig almost personally lie on one another
in an area quite even though
they themselves are not confined now
trying reconcile the inordinate cost
to the industry as growers.
If that was the case,
and we had to add significant area to building sizes,
knowing full well that under heat lamps, which is where, uh,
quite often the artificial environment is created for
growing the best piglets, they all sleep on one another.
Um, they're after, in many cases outta the same list.
So how do you square that in terms of animal sociology
and how they, how they interact
with one another in that regard?
Uh, so I think if I've understood your question, um,
the first thing to say is, again, um,
I know you've said you, uh, that we can take our submissions
as read, but please do read our submission.
Um, it's obviously contains a lot more detail
than we can provide here.
Um, again, to reiterate that, that the question
that you've asked the answer is
that these are farm systems issues.
So, um, uh, teasing apart certain aspects, like for example,
um, the piglets are able to be
provided with a heating source
or they're able to separate themselves from the mother.
Um, those, those are very specific to, uh, each farm system.
Mm. And so that's, that's why we are urging you
to promote cage-free farrowing
and lactation as the ultimate outcome
and avoiding the problems with the, um, temporary housing
that is proposed in the interim, um, leading up to, uh,
or going through some kind of transition.
So I realize that's not a, uh, specific response
to your question, but, um, that's
what the science would suggest to us. Thank you.
Thank you so much for your answer.
Um, further questions, members? Yes.
We've got three minutes left. Yes.
I've got a quick question. So, um,
you've heard me ask this before,
but I'll just ask it again, which is
around, um, piglet welfare.
And we have heard from people who, uh, give us, uh, advice
that, um, piglet welfare is better, um,
in a, in a farrowing crate.
I'm just interested in your thoughts on that.
Um, and just secondly, if, if you've got time, um,
useful comment around the difference between pre farrowing
and post farrowing, if you were going to advocate
for something, would it be, uh, say for a a a middle ground,
would it be to avoid farrowing crates in those first, uh,
in the, the pre farrowing time,
just given the need for ne building?
Uh, sure.
So just on the piglets versus cells, again, um,
sound like a stuck record,
but, um, we do cover that in our submission.
And, um, the, the point there is that there are systems
that meet the welfare needs of piglets and cells,
and these are the systems that we should be moving to.
Um, and uh, also wanted to reiterate
that the current proposal to confine cells
and crates as is, um, will not be better for piglets.
So, uh, confining cells and crates
and opening them up is a, um, a form of temporary housing
that, uh, provides, uh, you know, diff different abilities,
um, we believe is likely to lead
to an increase in piglet mortality.
And we go into the reasons for
that answer in our submission.
Uh, you also asked about nest building prior to furrowing.
So, um, again, we cover that in our submission.
I can, uh, throw to my colleague Dr.
Schutz for more information on it.
But, um, the short answer is that Nest building is a,
is a deeply ingrained
and innate behavior in pigs that's driven by,
uh, hormone changes.
And it does occur prior to furrowing.
Um, we heard from the speaker previously
that sometimes it can be difficult
to tell exactly when furrowing is due to start.
So, um, the outcome of that is
that introduces even more uncertainty.
So, um, you know, when does, when do you provide
or when do you draw a line between pre
and post farrowing in terms of the provision of those, um,
materials, finesse building?
Um, so Karen,
Sorry, I don't mean to interrupt,
but yeah, we, um, so if you'd be obliging to see
to wrap up, that would be great.
Yep, sure. So, uh, we, we, if on reading our submission,
you do want further information on that point,
we are happy to provide it.
And we're just reiterate that there, um,
is some more recent science
and some, uh, further recommendations from expert, uh,
committees post the advice that Naac sent to the minister.
And we'd be happy to provide more
information on that if you need. Thank you.
Thank you all. Thank you all very much for your time.
Thank you Ra for your question.
And thank you, uh, team for your answers.
Um, we've met time, very grateful
for your time this afternoon
and we'll now move into Sun Talk.
Thank you very much. Thank you all. Thank you so much.
So Sun Talk is in, in presence or online? Carla
Online.
Brilliant. Thank you so much.
We have Robert Van Barnal has just signed in.
Brilliant. Are you there, Robert?
I am. Mark. Brilliant.
Good to, good to see you in, in person and online.
Uh, as always, I will leave it with you.
We've got 10 minutes, please, by all means.
Now, a few moments for questions at the end.
Certainly. Thanks very much. Uh, my name's Dr.
Robert Van Barnfield. I'm the group CEO of Sunport.
Uh, I'm also an adjunct, uh, professor at the University
of New England and, uh, the University of Queensland.
I'm joined by my colleague Dr.
Kate Plush, uh, who also has a PhD in welfare science
and reproductive physiology.
And Dr. Darryl Dusa, who's the head
of our technical services, um, who, uh, uh,
is a internationally recognized meat scientist.
Um, thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
Uh, some pork as a business is about 55,000 sows in
Australia, so we're approximately double the size
of the entire New Zealand pork industry.
Um, and in New Zealand, we're the second largest producer
with 2,600 odd sales.
We operate a range
of production systems from full free range
through to intensive.
So we're quite familiar with all of the different, uh,
options that are available.
And I suppose as a business, we take a lot
of pride in the fact that, uh,
pretty much everything we do is under underpinned
by a science and evidence base.
Um, you know, we rely heavily on independent peer reviewed
publications and contribute significantly to that.
We have about nine PhD level, um,
people within the business.
A lot of them actually work in hands-on production on a
day-to-day basis.
Uh, and we participate in nearly 40% of all public sector
research in Australia involved with the pork industry,
either as a principal investigator
or as a, um, collaborator.
Now, after 10 years of research that we instigated
and funded ourselves, uh, we, um, as a business
have decided to move to, um,
close confinement free breeding systems.
So no mating stalls, no faring crates, um,
and no gestation stalls.
That'll come at about a cost of a hundred million dollars
to our business over, uh, 10 years.
If we're quick, um, you know, it will take us five years
to fast track conversion
of just Queensland to that new system.
But as a business, that's the decision that we have, uh,
chosen to take.
Um, and we did that with a remit that we wanted
to remove any capacity to combine the breeding female.
We wanted to protect piglets, we wanted
to protect our staff, uh,
and we wanted to provide capacity for natural behaviors.
This might sound unusual to you
because I'm hearing a lot of, uh,
feedback from other contributors
that this is something the industry opposes.
Now, having said that, we support this bill
and we support it primarily
because it might allow the industry to move forward, um,
without some kind of certainty.
You're actually compromising welfare of animals.
'cause people can't invest in their facilities.
They don't know what alternatives to move to.
So any process that's gonna accelerate
that would be greatly received from our perspective.
Um, I suppose as a business, we'd be very keen to see people
separate a desire
to end meat consumption from the Trojan horse of welfare as,
uh, a basis to make farming difficult.
Um, they're totally separate issues
and should be considered as such.
Uh, we hear a lot about science and evidence base.
I'm not hearing a lot of, uh, rejoinder
that are actually based on, on science.
Um, and we find from our own experiences
that anthropomorphic, uh,
opinions are actually more often than not a compromise
to welfare rather than a benefit.
Um, through our process, we've learnt a lot of things,
and that's, uh, if we keep using this welfare Trojan horse,
we're just gonna go from one topic to another.
Uh, so as a business, we're removing faring crates
and we have peer reviewed publications that shows
that our system has a welfare benefit for the sow.
It shows that we can protect people, it shows
that we can protect staff, um,
and, uh, you know, we've, we've, we've gone down that path
and yet I'm hearing no recognition other than, oh, well,
we'd prefer this in your system, or we'd prefer that.
Uh, we were asked many years ago
to move away from electrical stunning
to CO2 stunning on a welfare ground.
Now we're being asked to move back
to electrical stunning pre slaughter.
So it's just this endless loop that we seem to to be on.
So I suppose we are taking a
proactive approach as a business.
Um, we are setting our own welfare standards
and we're trying to make sure
that we always operate at the highest level.
Um, and pretty much, uh, uh, want
to stay ahead of the game at all times.
Um, and just, you know, can't emphasize enough that we need
to separate these, these two issues
and actually focus on what really is in the best interest
of the animal rather than using it
as an impediment to stop people farming.
And finally, um, you know, we would also be supportive
of New Zealand imposing similar standards
from a welfare perspective on imports.
Um, it's something that, uh, is just gonna give a free kick
to, uh, to other countries that, uh, aren't operating at a,
at a similar standard.
So there's lots of knowledge in in our room.
Um, I'm happy to stop there
and open, uh, up
for any questions if you'd like to ask them.
Thank you so much for what a very succinct delivery, uh,
on both and offering both sides
of the argument and or the debate.
And I think the final remark that you made in regards
to import health, uh, sorry, sorry.
Animal welfare standards, uh, from other jurisdictions.
Very salient. I've got a member
that has got a bill currently framed in that notion.
So well done you guys.
Um, yeah, questions team, this is well worth asking.
I've got one Mr. Chair, By all means. Steve Abel.
Yes, thank you. Yes, I do have the bill to, uh,
align in import with, uh, welfare standards.
Um, thank you for the support on that.
I wonder whether this new definition that's
to come into force in 10 years time, um, how that aligns
with your maternity ring in terms of the, um,
the spatial context,
or is, is this another another thing that's going
to be uncertain for farmers and for you?
I'm gonna let Dr. Plush answer that.
Um, thanks Rob. Uh, yeah, no,
So the, the specifications in the proposed bill, um,
don't outline any, uh, prescribed space allowance.
And we believe that that's a very positive thing.
Um, prescribing, uh, limits on, um, on housing design,
uh, really, uh, squash innovation.
And we believe that, that the product that we've developed
and um, and the way that we are housing ourselves
and piglets is innovative.
Um, and it, it will meet the space requirements, um,
because there is none, um, in the proposed bill.
So very supportive of what's there.
And can I just ask a sub to that, Mr. Just
Please, Steve? Yes, please.
Yeah. So you are rolling out,
you are maternity ring across Australia au wanting
to do it here as well?
Yes. Yeah. Okay.
And what sort of cost is that compared to a faring crate?
Uh, with the system that's, um, designed, uh,
we can put it in for roughly the same price
as a faring crate, but we don't require any
confinement at any point in time.
Okay. I'll leave some others to take questions, Mr. Chair,
Please. Other members, this
is very, uh, oh,
I've got a question. Uh, why
Is that?
Um, you said in your submission that you
have put a cost of a hundred billion dollars
that changing your system in Australia.
So firstly, why so costly?
And secondly, is that gonna have an impact
on the price of your product?
Uh, look, one of the objectives here was to be able
to do it so that we didn't have a significant increase in
our base cost of production.
Um, it's expensive
because we, you know, can't stop, uh,
supplying our customers.
Uh, we're a pretty important customer, uh,
a pretty important supplier to all of the major retailers.
So to actually implement the changeover you need
to build redundant space.
So we have to build new sheds first, put the,
the new system in, and then retrofit other sheds as we can.
So that takes time.
You've gotta go through new approval processes, uh, new das,
new bas, uh, et cetera.
Um, in New Zealand it'll be new resource consents.
So it's a timely
and expensive process that Rev requires you to,
to build new buildings so
that you can free up space to make the conversions
If I come back. That's
a very, uh, very salient supplementary, if I may,
on the back of those remarks.
How do you see the small farmers coping?
I mean, you're a large operation by virtue
of the remarks you've just offered,
but what about the mom and dad farmer?
We've just heard from Sean Malloy, I believe earlier on
as his surname, uh, small operator in Christchurch.
How does he square changes in the relation, you know,
you're a big operation, but how does
No, it's a, it's a great question mark,
and we've done that with them in mind.
Uh, and to Kate's point,
if you have outcome-based standards,
the farmers can work towards finding a very,
uh, good solution.
And I think that's what we've done.
We're not complain, we're not claiming
that our solution is the only solution.
There'll be many others, but when we've done our own
research and we see a benefit
and we think it's something that's commercially viable,
we are making that free to everybody who wants
to purchase one through a third party, right?
Um, and we've set it up so that it doesn't require
30% more space and a heap of nurse cells
or any of these other things.
We've done it so it is commercially viable and,
and, um, everyone has access to that technology for free.
We can't do more than that.
Brilliant. Very good answer.
Thank you, team, thank you so much for your time.
We're very grateful for your time.
This has been a wonderful submission.
Uh, it certainly, uh, uh, illuminated further points
of discussion and debate from my committee members.
So thank you all those
that are there present and those online.
Thank you, chair. Take care everyone.
Thanks you much, very much.
Um, cherry o we move now into our next
submission, which is New Zealand Common Sense Law, I believe
Not accepted, we're just trying
to get them signed in online.
Thank you, Carl. Thank you. Loading now.
Great. Great work everyone.
Everyone's asking great questions.
Um, he's just put, Uh, we've just had a Yeah,
comment comes through from that.
You may see it on your screen saying he can't present today.
Okay. Okay. That's, that's, that's okay.
We can possibly move across to, uh, a RO veterinary union
if they, uh, are willing or not.
Hello, welcome to the primary Production Select committee.
Thank you so much for joining us.
Thank you very much for having me. My name is Dr.
Yulia pastor, and today I'm representing
the Altoro Veterinarians Union, also known as the A VU.
The A VU is a voice
for employed veterinarians across the motu.
We, uh, advocate for fair
and sustainable employment, science led regulation
and the protection of animal welfare and public health.
We submit this statement
to express our deep concerns about the animal welfare
regulations for management of Pig's amendment bill,
and how it's been put
through our country's democratic process.
Now, I may take the full 10 minutes to present.
I'll do my best to make some time for questions.
That's fine. That's quite, but it's essential
that I get through all these points.
So the a's 10 point position is as follows, number one,
fairing crates are built specifically to restrict movement,
which is significantly detrimental to the mental state
and natural nest building needs of sows.
This is a clear violation of the five domains
of animal welfare and violates the legal standard
of animal welfare legislation in both altoa
and with many of our trading partners.
Number two, the violation
of the five domains puts at risk the reputation of ROA
as high welfare farming practices
and thus the high value commodities that we are able
to bring to the international market.
As a result, because ROA does not trade individual
commodities, we trade on the New Zealand brand a brand
to which all trade do domestic and overseas contribute.
Number three, farrowing crates have been found noncompliant
under the Animal Welfare Act
by the acts appointed independent oversight body,
the National Animal Welfare Act Advisory Committee,
also known as naac.
This finding by Naac was upheld by the Hive court in 2020,
as y'all will really know by now,
making fairing creates unlawful under
the Animal welfare Act.
Number four, previous welfare concerns across animal
agriculture industries have driven improved standards
with great success despite pushback from those industries,
these standards have only strengthened our international
footing in sustainable and agriculture.
A classic example is the Bobby Kaf Welfare regulations
introduced by Minister Nathan Guy in 20 26, 20 16.
And on that note, please amend our written submission.
Uh, we meant to write Nathan Guy,
but we accidentally wrote Andrew Hoggard.
Back to our points. Number five, the majority
of New Zealand's exported meat, venison, beef,
and lamb is all traded in premium markets.
Carrying the New Zealand brand of high welfare
and naturally kept stock inadequate welfare practices in Al
Teos pork industry have the potential
to undermine the mahi dun by the rest
of the animal agriculture industries through tainting them
with the negative implications of poor welfare.
We should be international innovation leaders across all
animal agriculture sectors like our beef, lamb,
and venison industries continue to be pork production.
Should therefore be striving to catch up to the example set
by the majority of all tero animal agriculture industries,
not attempting to continue an ethically unacceptable status
quo that would not be accepted for other production animals.
Number six, the industry has had well over five years
to consult on
and implement the, the measures under discussion.
Any companies that have not acted on them have shown a
willful disregard for the law
and the goodwill of the time they were allocated
in which to make these changes.
It seems unfair to penalize those in the industry
who have gone to the effort of making the changes required
in the allocated timeframe.
Less than half of the commercial pig farms in Al Toyota are
currently using farrowing crates indicating
that they aren't essential for the industry.
Number seven, we must be seen
to be internationally relevant.
And this step backwards would put us decades
behind legislation compared
to other OECD countries like Norway, Switzerland,
and Sweden, to name a few.
Again, this undermines the hard work
and hundreds of millions of dollars spent by the rest
of the animal agriculture industries
to market New Zealand's meat products
as high value and good welfare.
Number eight, the Royal New Zealand Society
for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, also known
as SPCA, which has statutory authority to enforce.
The Animal Welfare Act was not consulted prior
to the Bill's introduction, indicating
that the government is taking a rush
and potentially bias stance on this important topic.
Number nine, sentt in Animals was recognized in the 2015
Animal Welfare Amendment Act.
Pigs are known to be highly intelligent
and are protected by both the 1999 Animal Welfare Act
and the nine, the 2015 Animal Welfare Amendment Act.
Ethically, this is a topic
that requires at least consultation
with the relevant parties who are best placed
to advise on the regulatory impact.
For example, the New Zealand Veterinary Association,
veterinarians for Animal Welfare, roa, SPCA,
naac A VU All again, just to name a few.
Number 10, the public.
Your electorate are also unable to show their discomfort
regarding these practices by using their wallet wallets
to vote as there is currently no distinction at the point
of sale regarding animal welfare like there is
for other animal pro animal products, such
as eggs produced by laying hands.
The fact that other countries can produce meat cheaply
by using outdated techniques does not
mean we should follow suit.
Instead, regulated labeling should be considered
for both domestic and imported pork to distinguish
between high quality pork
and pork produced under lower animal welfare standards.
Dr. Marcello Rodriguez Ferra, who was here
with us not too long ago, again,
associate professor at Auckland University Faculty of Law
and President of Animal Law Association recently stated
that this amendment should outrage not just those
who care about animal welfare,
but anyone who cares about democracy.
And on this point, we pose the following question.
Given this coalition government has continued
to pursue adopting the regulatory standards, bill is law,
despite huge public opposition,
having nearly 160,000 submissions with over 98%
of oral submissions being against
and close to 90% written submissions against
what is the point of this submission process
for the animal welfare regulations for management
of pigs amendment bill,
especially if submissions will only be ignored.
This bill was put into the public view roughly two weeks
before submission closed
and only seven days were given for public submission.
This is unprecedented
and hardly a democratic interval for people to provide
considered and research feedback on a topic
that has already been deemed illegal five years ago.
Most, if not all of us here today, were also notified
with less than 24 hours of the timing
of our oral submissions, which makes planning to be present
for this important process ion possible.
Although we are here, we have been heartened to see
that some representatives of the industry have taken action
to preserve the welfare of the animals
that they farm, namely pigs.
If the pork industry is struggling with these changes.
There has been ample time now, well over 10 years,
some have referenced 25 for industry
to approach animal welfare organizations
and their own veterinarians
to seek advice on how best to implement them.
There are multiple management techniques
that can be considered, which are outside of the scope
of the current bill
that could have been implemented over the course
of the last five years to allow transition
to happen in a sustainable and industry friendly way.
And there still is time.
Instead, this coalition government proposes prioritizing
profit over and above the welfare
of highly intelligent production animals
and the reputation of all animal agriculture in roa.
This comes across as arrogant, lacking empathy,
and seemingly lacking understanding of the New Zealand brand
that the rest of the meat producers in this
country work hard to protect.
In summary, we strongly recommend
that this bill be withdrawn.
Veterinarians Union. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Sorry we've met time, uh,
very fulsome submission.
Thank you for sharing your thoughts
and ideas on behalf of our, um, a uh, yeah,
A TRO Veterinary Union.
We're very grateful for your
talk and have a lovely afternoon. Thank
You. Thank you
so much. Right, team.
Um, our next submitter is New Zealand Pork.
Welcome everyone. Please introduce yourself.
Welcome to see you in person.
I apologize for our abstention.
We are sort of here
and not, we're around the country as it were,
but not in person.
So please by all means lead off
and, um, uh, we'd be grateful for some time
and some questions at the end, if that's all right with you.
Yes, no problem. Thank you
for the opportunity to speak today.
Um, I'm Brent Kle.
I'm the Chief executive for New Zealand Pork. With me is Dr.
Kirsty Chichi. Uh,
she is an animal welfare scientist specialist in
pig, um, welfare.
And joining us online, he may not have managed to join,
I can't quite see, but is Jason Palmer, who's a pig producer
and our deputy board chair.
Uh, look, I wanna start off just
with some preliminary points.
Uh, there's been quite a lot of commentary and,
and misinformation in recent weeks,
so I just wanna be crystal clear on a couple of things.
Faren crates and faren systems are the maternity wards
for ourselves and piglets.
Um, the purpose of them is for the care
and protection of all animals in those systems.
They save piglets lives
and they give newborn piglets the best possible start,
and they give their mothers a safe
and calm environment in which
to undertake those first few days of care.
Further separating, uh, fact from fiction.
Um, under the current rules south spend about 80%
of their time outside of confinement, okay,
under these new proposals that will rise to almost 97%
of the time, and hopefully without an increase in piglet
deaths, that 3% time where they will be confined is
to protect piglets.
Uh, and lastly, um, look,
New Zealand pork actually supports an end
to the conventional faring crate.
Um, we do support,
however, the use of temporary confinement farmers
that are using those contemporary, uh,
conventional faring crepes will have
to rip them out and replace them.
We are not seeking to maintain the status quo.
There's no country in the world that's gone so far as
to ban temporary confinement for south entirely.
There's not one. Uh, and that's not
because other stations, other nations care less.
It's because they recognize the need to balance the welfare
of thousand piglets.
Um, these proposed rules, they, they, they sort of, they,
you know, they represent the most significant change in our
sector for more than a generation.
Um, if they proceed, indoor farmers will face major costs,
um, often the hundreds of thousands of dollars,
sometimes in the millions to replace those existing systems.
Um, and outdoor farmers won't be spared either there.
This is more than just founding
system that are being looked at.
So ensure our submission, um, uh, we feel
that the bill supports good welfare outcomes
for both sows and piglets.
It's firmly grounded in peer reviewed science
and it's practically achievable.
It provides farmers with the certainty
and time they need to make these once in a generation
changes responsibly and sustainably.
But we do recommend, um, additional support
to make the transition successful.
Um, that's things like research funding, um,
equal animal welfare standards for imported pork, um,
and joint monitoring of progress towards that transition.
Um, and the idea being
that we can all be confident New Zealand's leading
with integrity and evidence rather than ideology.
Uh, and I'll just stop there.
I think you've read our submission,
but I'd like to give you the opportunity to ask questions,
uh, for a maximum amount of time.
Thank you, Brent. Thank you, uh, Christy to see you again.
Uh, thank you both. Um, Christian's team,
I think this is very important that we, uh,
digest what we've just heard.
Steve got anything?
Yes, Mr. Chair, Please lead off.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Jett.
Um, I mean, I hate to make the the pun,
but you know, you guys would be like a,
a pig in mud right now
with the minister doing everything you've asked for.
Um, I wonder, are you concerned that a future government
won't be satisfied to keep, uh, any sort
of cages from other pigs?
And that by so staunchly advocating for retention
of faring crates, even
after this 10 year status quo maintenance, um,
they will be got rid of, and
therefore it becomes a real own goal
because of the huge investment in, uh,
making a fractionally, bigger faring cage.
Um, if it's just a in-between stage
to us getting rid of fairing crates altogether,
and surely it would be better.
This is my main question for you to work more closely
with those animal welfare groups to find a solution
that gives lasting certainty for New Zealand pig farmers
and protects the welfare of animals.
Um, yeah. Thank you Steve. Uh, three things there.
Firstly, um, the, uh, the suggestion
that we are, we are entirely happy with this is incorrect.
There are things we did not, um, uh, endorse
and we don't, we don't necessarily see the need for, um, uh,
especially when it comes to, um, space for growing pigs.
NPI science assessment showed
that there is an actually no evidence required for a change
to the status quo of a k value of 0.03.
However, we have suggested 0.034 as something we can accept.
So, uh, we haven't got everything we want.
Um, secondly, in terms of the, the, um, risk of a,
a future government, um, taking these rules away again, um,
that does pose the question back that, um, when they make
that change, um, have they taken into account the assessment
of the available international science
and literature, as has been done in this occasion
to inform that decision.
It's been quite clear on NPIs independent assessment
of what's out there that these, um, proposals meet the needs
of sows and piglets in a balanced way.
Um, so I'd like to know whether
or not a government doing
that in future would be paying heed to
that science or ignoring it.
Uh, and sorry, what was the
last part of your question,
Steve? There's quite a bit in there.
I mean, the main thing is, um, just
that if there is a more lasting alignment
between your industry and the welfare advocates,
and frankly, last party accord on this. Yeah.
Actually, You want, you want a position
that we can all hold to,
and currently this one is not one
that certainly the green party will hold to.
Well, absolutely. And I commend you on your support
of the bill, um, to propose equal standards for imports.
I think that is something that, um, both industry advocates
and animal welfare organizations support alike.
And it's something I urge all parts
of the political spectrum to seriously consider, um,
being brave on and doing something about.
Yeah. I have a question mark. Yeah, thank you.
Bio lead off.
Uh, so we've been getting contrasting science or,
or assessments of science from various submitters.
How as a lay person do we know what
to trust, what to believe? Good question.
Well, uh, I'd refer firstly to NPIs summary of the science
where they have looked across the available literature
rather than its select papers.
Um, but I'm not a scientist
and especially not a pig scientist.
Um, but Kirsty is,
Yeah, I think, um, the key parts
of our scientific positions were that we also
sought peer review.
So we had input from those
with independent animal welfare scientists.
Um, I was fortunate enough in the last couple of years
to be sent to Europe to go
and visit scientists who have a vast amount
of expertise in this area.
Uh, I visited farms that have free farm systems.
I visited farms with pens,
with temporary confinement systems.
And, um, if anything, it really reaffirmed that view
that some element of piglet protection is key
and that we need to focus on the behavioral needs
of the cell as well as the welfare of those piglets.
And this system has been extensively researched
for the last 25, 30 years,
and there is a wealth
of scientific information about temporary confinement
systems, which was all drawn upon to form our view.
Kirsty, can I just ask a question
on the back of that statement?
If, if we've got a moment to, uh, where this,
basically from what you've just said, you, you, there,
there appears to be, um, a, a, a confused, uh,
debate where we're talking about, uh,
ideology almost in a way, and, and, and sites.
And they're getting blurred in this moment.
So if we took the, I suppose the question I'm asking is if
we took the emotion out of the room
and just said, where do we wanna land?
Um, and what, what is for animal welfare in terms of,
you know, shower 300 kilos, trying to roll
around in a combined area,
and also a litter of eight to 12 where we accept
that there could be crushing
or having events if we don't have it.
So do you square that?
There's too much emotion in this and lot
and not enough science, um, and,
and dialogue in a scientific realm?
I can talk through the interacting factors that have led
to the development of these types of systems.
So essentially, absolutely sales have a strong drive
to build a nest before they give birth.
It's an innate behavior that's highly motivated, okay?
Yeah, it's important for their welfare.
It's also important for maternal behavior and,
and piglet survival.
Providing cells with manipulable material
before they farrow stimulates that behavior in every type
of farrowing system or environment you could ever design.
There's good evidence that manipulable material
assists cells to satisfy this behavior.
Okay? It reduces stress, it reduces stillbirth rates,
it reduces the farrowing duration
when cells farrow unconfined.
However, piglet mortality is higher than when they don't.
Pharaoh unconfined.
And we have this challenge
that we cannot tell the point at which a sal has stopped
nest building and when she is precisely going to Pharaoh.
So we have evidence
that if we change the sales environment very suddenly very
close to farrowing, it's detrimental to her welfare.
It's detrimental to farrowing
progress and to piglet welfare.
So we now have this difficulty of, uh, a balancing,
I suppose, which is not a word I like to use,
but considering the welfare of the sow
and the welfare of those piglets.
So this was the whole concept of temporary confinement,
except we cannot predict within a biological system when
some of these behaviors are going to happen
and when they're going to be completed,
and when farrowing is going to resume
and the days following, giving birth cells spend most
of their time lying down in all systems
that you can comprehend, including evidence
of this in wild bo
and farrowing crates in loose farrowing
systems and outdoor systems.
Their focus is on recovering from the farrowing process,
allowing their piglets to nurse for the first time
and to establish a nursing pattern.
That is what they're focused on in those early days.
Those first three days
or so are also where the majority
of piglet mortality happens.
70% of all of the piglets that die will do
so in those first three to four days.
So this is, again, the development
of temporary confinement systems is to ask ourselves,
what is the motivation of the sow?
Where do we have opportunities to minimize piglet mortality?
How can we provide for the behavioral needs of the sow
and minimize the her confinement as much as possible?
This isn't about opening up a farrowing crate,
it's about replacing a conventional farrowing crate
with an open pen that allows behavioral freedom
for all but four days.
It's a completely different system. Brilliant.
And essentially the basis of the system.
Brilliant. Uh, brilliant, succinct, um, very,
very thorough, um, breakdown of the biological process of,
of pigs giving birth and the behaviors there.
And so thank you both so much for coming in.
Very, very succinct, uh, submission.
Very grateful for your time.
I'm sorry we've met time
and we have to move on to our next submitters coming in.
But thanks again, team, thank you to the committee.
Thank you all. Thank you both.
And the person online, right team, we now have who
Hua helping you Animals,
I think is the pronunciation helping you animals?
Um, hello.
Hi, Sue Redman. Hopefully you've got questions.
Well, I'm just wondering, can you see my hand?
'cause I've had a few questions.
Oh, I, and Miles has been very good at sort of helping me.
Um, I'm having tech issues from my car, so, um, I Oh, okay.
Might not see. So that's call out.
Please call out, um, when you have a question
and to all members do the same.
And I apologize for the, um,
poor functionality of this process.
But yeah, I'm doing chair. Yes.
Uh, just a couple of things. I've gotta jump onto a phone
'cause I've gotta travel now to get a flight,
but I'll be on phone from now on
and just acknowledge that Rachel's had
her hand up a few times as well.
And it's just,
I just, I just impressed upon you just
to, to, to, to call out.
Uh, I won't be offended in the process,
so if it helps you get your question
answered, please just call out.
Um, yeah. So we now move across into our next submission,
helping New Animals,
Kira. So
my name is, um, Carolyn Press McKenzie,
and I'm the founder and the CEO of hoo-ha, which stands
for helping you help animals.
Um, we are New Zealand's leading independent animal welfare
organization, um,
and we currently have 106 thriving pigs
and piglets in our care at our shelter
on the Haywoods Hill in the Hu Valley.
I've worked closely with pigs, especially large white pigs
for nearly 30 years now,
and have found them to be incredible animals, intelligent,
emotional, and deeply social.
In my experience, pigs are exceptional problem solvers
even more so than dogs.
Over the years I've been
inside several intensive piggeries I've witnessed firsthand
the normalized suffering caused by this kind of farming,
where intelligent sentient beings are trapped
in inhumane systems.
I've seen the sense of hopelessness in the south's eyes
as their lives are confined and their instincts
and choices are denied.
I've also seen the light in their eyes
switch on when they've taken.
We've taken them away from those situations
as we introduce them to a new life of freedom
and social interaction for the very first time,
whether confined in an intensive pig farm
or free ranging in a paddock, their their wants,
their needs, and their exceptional intelligence is the same.
They are the same pig.
We wanted to thank the tenacity
of our colleagues at the New Zealand Animal Law Association
and safe for seeing this injustice through
to the high court ruling in 2000, uh, uh, 2020, um,
when there was hope and promise for significant change
when viewed through a genuine welfare lens.
The dysfunction of Pharaoh in crates has
always been obvious.
The confinement of a mother pga, she pharaohs unable to turn
around, nest
or nurture her piglets is nothing less than inhumane.
I was on deployment in a developing country just last week.
I I was in the Solomon Islands and I visited one piggery.
And even there I saw the simple farrow wing pen system,
allowing the mothers more space
and more of an opportunity to bond
with their piglets than the restrictive
systems in New Zealand.
My decades of experience with pigs has shown me
that they are excellent mothers.
Public mortality is not an
inevitability of space.
It is a manmade problem.
Ing c creates a cold, clumsy,
and an ignorant solution to an industry issue
that compassion, innovation,
and even basic common sense can easily resolve.
So to renege and allow the continued use
of faring crates in New Zealand would be, um, reprehensible.
I guess what I want to say is that the world is watching
New Zealand must do better, pigs deserve better
and no good will come from this amended.
Bill,
Thank you so much.
Great remarks. Um, Rachel boy's got a question, I imagine.
I do, I do. Thank you, chair. Thank you. Hi, Carolyn.
Rachel here. Hi Rachel. Nice to see you.
Hey, um, I've asked a few people this question
and um, just wondering if you've got any insight into it.
And actually just off the back
of New Zealand pork submission, um, where they claimed that,
um, they wanted mothers in a safe and calm environment.
There seems to be, um, in terms of the science
and the advice from various parties, uh, I guess a,
a balance to consider between the welfare
of the piglets immediately after, um, they've been born
and the welfare of the mother.
So I'm just interested in your comments on that in terms of
how we can move to a system
whereby we can actually achieve good animal welfare
for both groups, for the piglets and for the sows.
Because it seems to me at the moment that the
emphasis on is on piglet welfare
and not so much on the sow welfare.
Um, so I'm just really interested from your experience on
what you would see as the way
to get the balance right there.
Sure. I, I see this a lot in, um, an industry
that's driven by profit.
Um, even in puppy milling, for instance,
the parents will live an institutionalized life for the sake
of the, the babies being born and protected.
Um, and they move on.
But the, an animal, the, um, parents just say,
andit you in an awful situation.
Um, I think from my experience,
and I mean, we've just seen the birth
of six litters on our property.
Um, the, the cells arrived with us pregnant already.
Um, it's really not hard
to manage if you give an animal space
for the piglets to move away.
So just having a simple barrier.
Um, it doesn't have to be in a confined,
in a confined, uh, footprint.
Um, I think pigs are excellent.
Mothers piglets can move around
and they do, um,
they do have the opportunity to move around.
Where it goes wrong is when you've got piglets being born
and born in an area where there is a wall, a solid wall.
And the mum can sort of lean against them and squish them.
But if you've got the right sort of setup,
which would be easy, I mean, the Solomon Islands had it,
right, they had quite large pens, um, with a divider.
Piglets could zoom in and out,
and the mums had an area where they could nest
and they could move around.
Um, and it's not, it's not rocket science, it's just,
I guess, spending more money on the footprint.
And I think, um, the mums can do it.
We've just gotta give them the opportunity
to do what they can do.
If, if I could ask a supplementary question.
I think Rachel Boyer had a great question, uh, just now,
and your answer I think is quite succinct,
but you did point to the fact
that perhaps the industry was driven by profit.
And I think I, I've got your remarks squared there.
Uh, how do you reconcile some
of the remarks from the previous submitters
where they said it could cost them hundreds of thousands,
if not millions of dollars to make the,
the considered alterations over a period of time?
W why is it so that you think that in the moment
that they are forced with those sort of changes
and those costs, they wouldn't be driven by profit?
Don't you think think that those are odd remarks, uh,
given what they're facing?
Uh, no. 'cause I think that if you're in business,
you're in business to make profit.
So this is the business they've chosen.
Um, there are inadequacies within their business
and they need to be accountable for making those changes.
I dare say that in a lot of businesses, um, you know,
you see what's happening and the change that's coming.
They've had plenty of time, um,
E even if it's mom and dad businesses and,
and they're forced with hundreds of thousands of dollars
of additional costs.
You think that's fair? Do you?
Well, I've just had to spend several million dollars
building a shelter to bring these displaced animals in.
Um, I think in wherever, whatever sector you are in is going
to cost you to set up and to do your job properly, right?
I mean, there's constantly health and safety changes
and regulations that we all have to adhere to.
Mm-hmm. Um, there's employment rules
and regulations that we have to adhere to.
It's just life. You need to put your big kids' shoes on
and you need to do what you need to do to do your job.
Well,
Thank you. Thank you. Thank
you so much.
Any other questions before we wrap up, team? No.
There appear to be none unless Sue Red Main had one.
No, it appears not. So thank you
so much for your submission.
We are very grateful for your time this afternoon.
Time is precious. So thanks again for your time
and your very wholesome submission.
Your afternoon.
Now move into the next submission, which is the R-S-P-C-A.
Thank you so much, everyone.
Please by all means come forward and join us.
We apologize for not being in person.
Um, parliament is in recess
and we're all sort of around the country.
Zooming in, I'll leave it to you, good people to, uh, uh,
offer some introductory remarks.
And if you would like questions,
that would be great at the end.
Thanks. Thanks very much.
Thank you for the opportunity to present to you today.
My name is AA Dale.
I'm the Chief Scientific Officer for the SPCA.
I've been an animal welfare scientist for over 25 years.
Um, I've been at the SPCA for 10 years.
Um, I have been on for six years and also my for six years.
So very well versed with, with those things.
I also lead SBC certified
and SBC certified as our humane farm accreditation scheme.
And I also lead pig standards there.
And I also have visited pig farms all across New Zealand
and also internationally.
So just to, just before the chair asks, I am not a farmer,
but I spend most of my time on farms.
Very good. Good.
And I also just want to make it very, very clear.
SPC is not anti farming. Mm-hmm.
We want a sustainable
and thriving domestic pig farming industry
that is future proofed.
We work with farmers, we work with industry bodies, we work
with retailers, we work with supermarkets.
And we can tell you what the international trends are saying
and we can tell you what the local trends are saying in
relation to supermarkets wanting to buy or not buy.
As the case may be. Product coming from cages,
including faring crates.
Our mission at the SBCA is
to advance animal welfare and prevent cruelty.
And that is why we are here today.
Now this bill claims to raise welfare standards,
but in reality it is enshrining the status quo for 10 years
and then locking on standards that would
otherwise be unlawful.
SPCA's position is simple. This bill should not exist.
It's introduction signal, serious failings in
how animal welfare regulation are
being developed in New Zealand.
We are told this bill is science based,
but NPI science summary is out of step
with contemporary animal welfare science.
And it contradicts naac that has been set up
as your independent science advisors.
So please use them. It also contradicts SA
and it contradicts leading global pig welfare experts.
It misrepresents the discipline of animal science,
animal welfare science as subjective.
It makes unsupported claims such as suggesting fing crates
with nesting material provide for good welfare.
And it incorrectly implies
that economics can override welfare.
It cannot, it says so in the act
and the high quarter said it as well.
Just gonna hand over to Marie before I continue.
Thanks Any. So a brief introduction for myself,
um, KIAA committee.
I'm the scientific officer for farmed animals at East PCA.
I have a master's degree in animal science.
Uh, and the topic was on the barriers to New Zealand farmers
for providing nesting material to farrowing cells.
And thank you again to New Zealand
port for their help with that project.
Um, and for full transparency, I guess, um, I used to work
for the Ministry for Primary Industries in the codes
of welfare team, and I supported the National Animal
Welfare Advisory Committee.
Just wanted to touch briefly on some
of the process around this bill.
Uh, the Animal Welfare Act, which was introduced
and amended by previous national governments,
relies on expert advice from the National Animal Welfare
Advisory Committee and Public Participation.
But in this process, NAAC has been sidelined
after recommending a transition away from crates.
SPCA was excluded from targeted consultation.
Uh, after we raised the risk
of judicial review in a 2022 meeting,
the public has had only two weeks to engage with a rushed,
confusing process without access to the updated code
of welfare for pigs.
And key papers in justification were dropped
to mid consultation, some just 24 hours
before submissions closed.
SPCA submits that this is not a system acting
with integrity, transparency,
or respect for the Animal Welfare Act.
This bill also locks into legislation,
animal welfare standards that Naac
and others say, do not meet the act and would
otherwise be, um, Possibly subjected to judicial review.
I think you have probably received
quite a lot of submissions.
Um, the New Zealand public cares about this.
They care about the way that animals are farmed.
Should I go through the recommendations?
Oh, just finish off my part first. Yeah. Okay.
So you've heard about how cells have a strong biological
need to build a nest and that creates,
completely prevent this because they cannot move
and turn around and build a nest.
Now it's also confirmed this in their, in their, um, advice
to the minister of which I'm,
hopefully you have all got a copy as well.
There was one advice piece from MPI
to the minister that was great.
It was on nest building. We can absolutely agree with that.
But, um, their own economic analysis showed
that it was very, very cheap
to provide nest building materials for sales.
Now. So we don't know why it's not, um,
being implemented now and why it has to be in 10 years time.
We also are concerned about the minister
and officials citing that Glen Corsey paper, um,
to justify crates,
but it's unfortunately been misinterpreted.
Basically, in short, the authors conclude
that piglet mortality depends more on design
and management than the system itself.
And let's be clear, every single system for cells
and that Pharaoh result in piglet deaths,
there are piglet deaths everywhere.
And we've heard the reasons before
why, but this is what happens.
So we just need to be very clear that if we are going to,
um, have crates
and then open the crate up, we are likely
to result in more piglet deaths because they need cells
and piglets need enough space.
He, by Nares recommendation was 6.5 meter square
with nest material with trained staff.
And then you'll end up with better
or equal people at welfare as within crates.
And now we're going to pass over to our recommendations.
Yeah. So just to finish off,
I'll touch on our recommendations that we've made.
Um, SPCA suggests that there is an independent review
or inquiry into
how secondary legislation is developed
under the Animal Welfare Act.
And that would, uh, resolve a few things.
Uh, we think that would prevent a process
like this from happening again.
Uh, it would address the coalition agreement point
between the National and Act parties
to reform the National Animal Welfare Advisory Committee.
And it would close off the regulations review, uh,
select committee recommendation to do this review
the transition period, which should be reviewed so that it's
as short as possible, must be towards practices
that are compliant with the Animal Welfare Act.
So that means the recommendations
that NAAC has already been made.
Uh, we think that there should be an immediate ban on new
flowering crate systems being built from now.
Um, and that would go some way to restoring public trust,
uh, that the government takes animal welfare seriously.
The clauses that restrict NAICS future advice should be
removed from the bill.
You should have received a submission from NAIC on that.
We think that they probably have made a submission.
Uh, they used to do submissions regularly.
If you haven't got one
and are not hearing from them, uh, you may want
to ask some questions about that
'cause I would suggest that that is strange.
Finally, we want to see support for farmers.
Uh, this is a big ask
to move towards free freeflowing systems.
Our survey suggests that New Zealanders do want
to support farmers to move to genuinely freeflowing systems.
SPCA would support, um, some help for pig farmers.
Uh, and so would, one
of the biggest things we could do is restrict imports um,
low welfare imports,
and I think you'll hear a bit more about
that from Animal Policy International.
And back to, to conclude.
Absolutely. So just briefly
to conclude this bill is not good law making
and New Zealanders expect better from members of Parliament.
Um, just to highlight this,
that you don't have the public support, 88%
of the public are concerned about faring crates, mainly
because the South can't move.
And 75% of New Zealand's, new Zealanders want faring crates
to be phased out now or within five years.
Thank you very much for your time,
and we look forward to questions.
Christians team, we've got two minutes left, so members,
um, make them succinct please.
Steve's got one and I've got one.
Yeah, thanks Steve. And we'll go.
Oh, sorry, Steve and Rachel. You go Rachel.
Oh, hi team. Nice to see you.
Um, I'm just, um, I think you've covered off the stuff
around um, sos really nicely.
And I had a question, um, though about
SPCA not being involved in the most recent
round of consultation.
Um, have you got any comment on that?
Like, is it it usual practice for you to be consulted
by ministers and by NPI on, you know, significant changes
to animal welfare legislation like this one?
Yes, and we weren't consulted
And I just point out for the 2020, um, transition,
those emergency regulations especially,
I did receive a copy of those.
Yes. Because this PCA also helps to enforce the act.
Yep. Cool.
Thank you. Um, um, just a quick, um, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Um, what, what do you take from the inference from Sunport
that, um, you are against all animal farming, um,
and how does that relate to your advocacy for support
for farmers to transition to free farrowing?
And would it be correct to assert
that there should be a version of a form of pig farming
that is acceptable to the SBCA and is workable for farmers
and could therefore achieve cross-party support in the house
and give certainty for the industry for years to come?
Yes, there is, but I just wanna clarify that we,
there seems to be confusion from, from some of the, uh,
submitters and also in some of the, uh, documents that were
released through the consultation period.
We are talking about indoor systems.
We are talking about moving from a faring crate
to a large enough faring pen, 6.5 meters squared
to enable to have the cell
and the piglet welfare equally balanced and met.
So they exist. Um, in relation to Sunport,
I have met Kate plush at many different places.
I don't know what they're talking about.
I know that NPI have funded a significant amount
of money into that industry in terms
of trialing these maternity rings in New Zealand.
Um, the exact amount, I'm not sure,
but I am concerned that that deal was made
during the 2022 consultation, um,
that was public consultation or, or, or before.
So we wait to see,
but yes, of course there is, uh, middle ground
that everybody can agree on,
but unfortunately the bill
that's been put forward is not that
The time for another Mr. Chair.
Sorry, we've met time, Steve, I apologize.
We're quite overtime.
Um, I apologize to everyone,
but we tried to keep quite a succinct,
um, submission process.
Thank you so much everyone for coming in.
Um, we've got, as I say, quite significantly at time,
but yeah, uh, we look forward to further remarks
and comments from you in the near future.
Thank you very much. Right.
We'll now move into Vets for Animal Welfare
as our final submission.
We have Animal Policy International, sorry.
Oh, sorry. Animal policy.
Yeah, they're, and they're in person here in the room,
Right? It's the Animal's
Animal Welfare post that this year,
or was this the last submission?
Uh, car. We've
Got one more after this, which is
Veterinarians for Animal Welfare.
Brilliant. Brilliant. Fantastic. So great team.
Thanks very much. You've,
you've heard my diligent clerk sort of squaring me up.
Very good to have you here.
And I apologize for being, uh, in video link.
Uh, most of my mps around the country are doing good work,
so please by all means lead off
and we'll have questions at the end.
I'm allows
Thank you chair and committee members for the opportunity
to speak to you about such a critical issue.
My name's Rami Gelber
and I'm policy manager at Animal Policy International,
an NGO, working on farmed animal welfare
and trade with me here.
Today. I'm very happy to be joined
by International trade lawyer Tracy Epps,
who can answer any questions you may have
regarding the legality of the import measures
that I'm gonna be touching on in my opening remarks.
The bill in its current form,
proposes insufficient welfare improvements while entrenching
a double standard where imported products can be produced in
conditions that are illegal in this country.
The bill must be amended first
and foremost to require welfare improvements
that would actually be in line with the Animal Welfare Act
and require all products on the market, including imports
to meet those same standards.
New Zealand needs to follow through on phasing out the use
of faring crates and join the ranks
of nations genuinely leading on animal welfare like Sweden
and Switzerland, who've already implemented full bans
and faring crates with all the
reputational benefits that that confers.
Many of the submissions here today rightly addressed the
inconsistencies between the proposed changes
the Animal Welfare Act itself and the public's expectations.
So here I'd like to primarily highlight the importance
of our international reputation in this matter
and the necessity
of import requirements in this conversation.
Around 60% of port consumed in this country is imported
with 90% of that coming from countries that allow the use
of cage systems in pig farming.
This is just a half measure in this proposed bill
to only focus on the 40% that is produced domestically.
New Zealanders understandably,
but mistakenly assume that our animal welfare laws apply
to all products sold in this country.
It's absolutely critical
to keep improving our animal
welfare standards in New Zealand.
And in order to address this whole issue, we must ensure
that products on the market, all products on the market
that is follow the same standards
and addressing this is entirely feasible.
WTO rules explicitly permit import restrictions based on
concerns over public morals.
Under Gap Article 20,
California's Proposition 12 provides a successful model
that we can look at where they ban the use of sales stores
for pigs and required all products on the California market
to meet the same standards.
New Zealand can do the same.
In our new report, we found that pork producers,
pork exporters to New Zealand can meet higher welfare
standards, and that includes if we were
to ban faring crates entirely.
For examples,
Spain produces 36 times more faring crate free pork
for their exports to New Zealand.
Uh, additionally, the EU is phasing out cage farming
and is committed to apply these standards to imports.
So in closing, I urge this committee to recommend amendments
that firstly, honor New Zealand's commitment
to animal welfare by mandating a complete phase out
of these confinement systems,
including faring crates and mating stools.
And secondly, apply these same standards
to all pork products sold in
New Zealand, regardless of their origin.
This can be done by amending the Animal Welfare Act,
or by recommending the government adopt the closing the
welfare gap member's bill.
This can help the government fulfill its legal requirements
to phase out the ba, phase out the use of farian crate,
prepare, prevent animal welfare gains from being undermined
by imports and assist farmers in transitioning effectively.
Thank you so much for your time, and Tracy
and I will welcome your questions now.
Well, thank you team very much. Very, very succinct.
Um, as you'd be aware, we're talking about, um,
the legislation of welfare in New Zealand
and it's, um, I don't wanna blur the lines
and it probably outside of the scope of the bill, uh,
the bill that you referenced was to Steve Abels,
which is a very, probably very good piece
of legislation moving forward,
yet to be reconciled, of course.
But, um, how do you square up,
just incidentally why you have mentioned it?
Uh, the fact that we do import 60% of the pork, um,
that is consumed in New Zealand.
And if we were just as a matter of interest to put, um,
constraints on other jurisdictions,
albeit it's not really part of this legislation,
that it would hurt the most disadvantaged New Zealanders
that often can't afford, uh, the more expensive items.
So have you thought that out, do you think? Just
As a Yeah, so yeah, thank you for the question.
We've, uh, released a report last week called the Vision
Interaction Report,
where we did a price impact analysis
on the proposed measure.
Um, and we found
that it would cost 25 cents per person per week, um,
if we were to adopt this measure for pork.
And that includes varying crates.
And we feel that this is vastly outweighed by the benefits
to our reputation in New Zealand
and for aligning standard standards
with New Zealand's expectations.
Um, most New Zealanders just aren't aware
that our animal welfare laws aren't applied to import.
So we feel like ensuring that that is, um, consistent
and consistent with expectations would be
worth that that cost
Application 25 kilo, is that right? Or
25 cents per person per week?
I've got one at this time, Yes, please.
Yeah. Thank you. Uh, exit submission, um,
it's really notable that one of the things that also, well,
a lot of submitters seem to agree on, both from industry
and from animal welfare advocate side, is that, um,
a requirement that imported animal products meet New
Zealand's welfare standards would be beneficial, uh,
on all counts for the fairness, uh, for farmers
and certainly for the welfare of animals.
And so your advocacy in that space is, uh,
hugely informative and seems well supported across all sides
of the argument.
I wonder, um, how quickly this sort
of legislation should be passed, um, in terms
of moving us along that trajectory,
which this bill doesn't do,
but which most New Zealanders clearly want us
to be moving along towards better, well,
better welfare outcomes for animals here and overseas.
Do you wanna talk about the animal products Bill?
Um, sure. Uh, just to explain it. Yeah.
Um, so I think, yeah, the Bill Steve
that you're talking about, um, sorry,
what's the title of it?
Um, would make animal products close the Welfare Gap
Amendment bill, um, would actually make amendments
to the Animal Products Act, um, to empower the minister
to make regulations applying the same animal welfare
standards that apply to New Zealand pork, to, um, any,
to any pork that is sold in New Zealand.
So that would mean imported pork as well as domestic pork.
Um, so that's a separate, um, piece of legislation
or set of legislative amendments, um,
that has been developed.
Um, so that would sit alongside point
Of order. Mr.
Chair. Could, could I raise the point of order? Yeah,
Can, yes, you can.
Please. Point of, I think
I think Oh, No.
Refused to raise a point of order, I believe.
Oh, sorry. Uh, um, The,
Uh, the, uh, um,
submissions are about this particular bill.
We're not talking about the other bill. Right.
Um, although I know Steve would be quite happy to,
but, um, uh, yeah.
Um, we can't do anything about the other bill
'cause it's not before this committee at the moment.
That is correct. Point of
what Sue Red succinct, please sue.
Oh, mine was the same as miles'.
I just think we need to stick to the actual bill
that we're trying to debate that we are supposed
to be hearing submissions on.
It's another matter. It's a matter for another day.
Yeah, thank point. I just,
can I speak to that point of order?
Uh, we have earlier, we have earlier in the day
with a previous submitter allowed for that with,
while Cavendish allowed for that conversation to be had.
So I think we also need consistency.
I I I, I, I think I, I, speaking to the point
of order from both sides of the house,
I think in this moment we've had a long day.
I, I concur that it is somewhat off script
and, um, well, I have elucidated that point
and perhaps I shouldn't have gone down the line
of questioning that I did that further, um,
further went down into another legislation
and the barriers in and out of that.
So let's go back to the topic
and, um, I think I acknowledge point of order
and to see that both sides of the house
had their views heard, um, as the chair.
I think I'll just rule both, both salient remarks
and I'll just go back to Bill
and the minutes that are left to us.
So thanks team.
If the, if the submitters could, could continue speaking
to the legislation in front of us, that would be great.
Thanks. Members, I go back to the submitters,
um, if they still with us?
Yes, they here. Yeah, please.
Um, please tie up with your, um,
with your remaining remarks if there's any
or there's any further questions.
Members. We have a minute left. Uh, uh, diligent.
My old Sanderson has kept me in the loop,
so any further questions?
I have one. If, if I may.
Um, in the minute remaining, uh, are you aware of the fact
that, um, the, the pork industry is saying
that they have made significant transitions
and changes, uh, uh, in this moment and,
and quite significant costs would be incurred, uh, if some
of the proposals offered were to be implemented?
Um, how do you square that and, and,
and sort of about 30 seconds if you can?
Yeah. Uh, we recognize that there's cost associated
with this, but we go back to the Animal Welfare Act itself,
and that that is the, that we need to, um, comply with how,
what it prescribes, which is ensuring
that we don't prevent animals
for expressing their natural behaviors.
And we know that the faring crates do
contravene that, right?
So while we're sympathetic with, uh, the cost associated
with complying with the act, we, we feel that, that
that's just, uh, part of it.
Um, and we need to make sure that the industry complies.
Thank you so much. Very grateful for your time, team.
Thank you very much.
Um, very succinct, very grateful for your time.
Um, and I wish you a good afternoon.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you all.
Um, we now move on to our next submitter, Cara, as,
as always, as sharp as she can ever be.
Um, we'll que me up on who that is.
I think I got one ahead of myself.
No worries. Veterinarians
for animal welfare and they are online.
Brilliant, brilliant hearing from,
we can see you.
Thank, thank you so much for joining us
this, this afternoon.
Very grateful for your time.
You, you've obviously heard how the process works.
We've got 10 minutes to hear from you
and have questions asked
and answered, so I'll leave it with you.
Thank you. Uh, um, just wanted to make a few remarks.
I am taking my report as read,
and I'm not going to rehash it
because, uh, a number of the, uh,
speakers have already spoken and mentioned all the things
that I would otherwise talk about anyway.
So on that note, I just want to, uh, thoroughly
and wholeheartedly endorse what the New Zealand Animal
Welfare scientists have said
and the SPCA, uh, particularly around the move
to temporary Faron crates
and the impact that will have if it's not managed
appropriately, which it isn't through this bill.
Um, and also the comments
of the New Zealand Animal Law Association, in particular
around the significant, uh, concerns that we have
around the legislative process.
Mm-hmm. Uh, it's irregular, it's alarming,
and frankly, as an indictment on the mps,
we're prepared to support this.
Uh, it would be quite a legacy to have on your cv, uh,
that this is a piece of legislation
that you'll choose to support.
I want to front end a conversation that has been had
with a couple of parties around the level
of emotion in the room, and I'm sure you were going
to ask me the same thing, mark.
Um, but I agree, I think there is a lot of emotion,
and I think that's
because farmers are terrified, really worried and uncertain.
They cannot see their future, uh,
other than another 10 years with a whole bunch
of uncertainty at the end of that 10 years as well.
So I understand why there's a huge response to this bill
and this whole process
and conversation, um,
that has stemmed back over a couple of decades.
Farmers need certainty and this bill doesn't provide it.
I also wanted to just respond
to Suncorp's comment about eating meat, uh,
or trying to shut down farming.
I do not. I eat pork. I'm a a staunch supporter of farming.
I'm a farmer's daughter and I've been on many, many farms.
I also wanted to say that anthropomorphism is no longer the
travesty it once was.
And people need to rethink, uh, the idea
that animals can have emotions that are similar
to what people have.
They're not the same. My emotions aren't the same
as your emotions, but the fact that they can have emotions,
uh, is, is no longer in question.
And it's disappointing to hear people,
uh, playing that card.
So about five points to make outside those opening,
uh, frustrations.
Uh, first of all, you've heard science from both sides,
and I'm not interested in wad into that.
You can cherry pick what you want.
Uh, what we need to think about is if the precautionary
principle and ENT animals
and the idea that actually if there's, if there's any doubt,
precautionary principle should, uh, take precedent
as should the independence
and expertise of some of the parties that have submitted.
And I note here, the New Zealand Animal Welfare
Scientists Group, uh, hold a bunch of, um, skills
and, uh, knowledge in this area
that there is no other group, uh, like in New Zealand.
Secondly, um, this bill just speaks to a complete
and utter lack of long-term vision.
So there's an energy crisis upon us.
We've got free trade agreements, we've got customers,
we've got consumers.
And all this is doing is baking in, uh, as I said
before, further uncertainty, but capital expenditure.
Um, which as Steve said, you have to go,
do they feel comfortable spending, uh, spending
that money when there's no certainty
that this bill is gonna go go the long term?
In fact, I guarantee it won't.
And as Kate said, from the welfare, um, scientist group,
almost everything we're seeing here around the issues, um,
that are spoken about our farm systems issues
that can be addressed by changing farm systems.
And some of that comes down to how we manage our environment
and regulating to allow our pigs to have more space,
because that's an issue that needs to be dealt with at a,
a resource management act.
Whatever. It's, its, its new face is going to look like.
Um, but again, that's about a plan and a long-term vision.
Um, the failing farms that were spoken of,
that's a very complex issue.
And I know for a fact that some of the reasons, uh, a reason
that some of those farms broke down was that the processing
of free farm pork was blocked, um, by people, um,
uh, a number of years ago.
And, uh, they, those farms failed.
I've mentioned the legislative process, uh,
and I won't say any more about that,
but just finally, um, I will acknowledge that there needs
to be a stop gap measure put in place
because of the urgency that has been engineered
by this process.
Uh, and simply, we can't have farmers on the
18th of December or operating illegally.
So I will acknowledge that.
Um, but this is, this is not the right way to do it.
And, um, on top of that, uh, what I would like
to see is transition support for farmers so
that they can get through this sticky period
that's been engineered, uh,
but then know
what they're doing in the long term into a farming system
that will serve them for the long term, um, as well as, um,
for the welfare of their sows and the piglets.
And I'm happy to take questions.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Very, very insightful.
Um, there's some quite pointed remarks there.
Uh, if I could just touch on
and then I'll go to any other member. Um, yeah,
I've got a question mark.
Uh, yeah, thanks r um, straight to you in a minute.
What do you think, if I may,
about the remarks from Kirsty Chile who is a,
a scientist in animal welfare, who,
who would push back on some
of your comments about the animal welfare, uh,
and especially in regards to piglets and the outcome?
Yeah, as I, as I mentioned, there's science
that goes both ways on this.
And we should therefore revert
to the perfor precautionary principle in acknowledging, uh,
and, and doing what we need to do to support, uh,
our sentient animals.
But outside that, that there's, you know,
if we come at it from a completely independent perspective,
um, there are ways through this where other farmers
and farm systems people internationally,
people in New Zealand successfully farm pigs
without farrowing crates.
I mean, it's not, this is not new, right?
Like, lots of people are already doing it.
It's, it's quite incredible
that we're still still here having this argument in 2025.
Uh, well, I wouldn't be, I wouldn't think as an argument,
I just think it's a salient, but I'll go to Rachel.
Uh, thanks
Chair. Hi Helen.
Um, I'm just interested in, um, comments, some
of the comments that have come up today around certainty
for industry and that I guess there's a risk with,
if this bill passes, that we're going to end up with
a policy change and that actually doesn't give certainty.
I mean, what would your advice be in terms of trying
to reach some agreement so
that we can actually give some certainty to industry, um,
make some significant improvements in animal welfare
and kind of, you know, avoid having a flip flop
of policy back and forth over numerous years?
Just the easy questions today, Rachel.
Yeah, look, I mean the, the, the short, um,
somewhat glib answer to that is in the meantime we should do
nothing other than, uh, put a stop gap measure in
for a short period of time,
and then work with industry to create a healthier,
better farm system that is an extensive farm system
that is going to see farmers right into the future.
And that's not 10 years,
because in 10 years people are gonna invest in,
uh, in capital, right?
They're gonna put in or they're gonna change
and put in temporary foreign
crates and then they're gonna have to go.
And I suspect that in that 10 years,
the money won't have been repaid,
that they've spent making a temporary transition
to temporary crates.
It, it's mental. So we should, I, as I said,
I acknowledge we're gonna have to have a stop gap right now
'cause December's just around the corner.
Um, but that should be a very short, uh, stop gap with a,
a much longer and more comprehensive plan
around transitioning away from Faren crates.
Full stop.
Thank you. I just, Steve Abel or Miles
or Sue Redman got a question, please.
Um, Yeah, Sue, please.
Oh, we, we've heard that the bill actually supports, uh,
the Goodwill Goodwill Act act to outcomes,
and it's also practically achievable.
And, um, I think one
of the previous submitters talked about the,
under the current rules sales spend
80% of their time in a crate.
Under the new rules, it'll be 97%.
So, um, you talked about outside Yeah, pardon?
Yeah, sorry, outside, sorry, outside the crate.
That's right. And, and,
and the prevention of deaths, of course.
And we've also heard from people about some
of the natural behavior of pigs being
that they attack other piglets and other litters.
So we, it's about protecting, as I said, it,
it's about balancing the needs of cells and piglets.
And someone else referred to it as the sort
of maternity ward providing a safe
and responsible maternity ward.
And I'm just interested in why
you are so concerned about it.
You talked about not having it on our cv,
but at the same time you raised the point that something has
to be done by the 18th of December.
Um, and I take your point that to me,
we've gotta allow the industry
to move forward in a practical way
without feeling threatened.
We've gotta allow them to invest
and do the best that they can.
They do.
Yeah. So I'm not gonna readdress the problems
or the, the conversations
and the conflicts around welfare, um,
that has been hashed out so many times
and it just doesn't bear out to be true.
So I would encourage a thorough dive into the research on
that to establish that position for yourself.
As far as the, um, the transition period goes,
what I'm talking about is putting in a stop gap
for perhaps two years
because something's gonna have to happen
whilst there is thorough, uh, consultation
with the wider industry international experts,
animal welfare scientists to create a transition
to a free farrowing system rather than, uh,
what's happened here, which is putting in temporary crate
suggestion, which is gonna end up having
to be turned over in 10 years time or sooner.
So what we're talking about is a much more,
um, it's much harder.
I'll acknowledge that. Um,
and it's probably gonna require some other legislative
change because as I said
before, um, the current restraints around
where you can put pigs outside
because of the damage they do, um, is, is something
that needs to be worked through.
So this is what we call a wicked problem.
Lots of moving pieces. All the players need
to be at the table, not just those with vested interest
to sit down and figure out
what it's gonna look like for the long term.
I just wanna add again,
that we all know what's happening to energy, right?
It is becoming more and more expensive.
And Sam talked about the fact that there's lots of energy
and lots of money going into the system
and he needs atmospheric control.
Now that reeks up a bird barn and when you put birds
and barns in control of the atmosphere
and then things go wrong, they all die, right?
It's horrendous. So we're now talking about establishing the
same thing for pigs.
It's absolutely crazy in the face of increasing, uh,
energy crises throughout the world,
which is absolutely gonna hit us
here in New Zealand as well.
So it's another reason not to make this dumb decision.
Thank you very much. We're, we've met time, very grateful
for your submission thoughts, um, both salient
as they are and um, objective.
So thank you so much for your time.
Cheer, same Right o team.
Thank you all. Um, I'll move across to the clerk
to get further advice about where we are at
in the process for this afternoon.
Fantastic. Would members be able
to move into a private session?
And then just a few quick comments from me.
Brilliant. About tomorrow
There. Surely.
How do we do that? We Leave, there's
A different Link at the top of the agenda.
Thanks private. Thanks everybody for coming.